---
layout: post
title: "What Is The World? Sangha US 1 08 21 21"
pubDate: 2021-08-21
author: Dhammarato
categories: [transcripts, Dhamma Talk]
tags: [transcripts, metta, anapanasati, sati, dukkha, sukkha, sankhara, vedana, vipassana, samadhi, sangha-us, one-on-one, nurturing, compassion, mindfulness, meditation, noble-eightfold-path, world-concept, pain-perception, daily-life-practice]
image: "https://i.ytimg.com/vi/5SLpPCjKVNM/maxresdefault.jpg"
description: "Transcript of August 21, 2021 Dhamma Talk with Dhammarato and Friends"
featured: false
hidden: false
toc: true
assemblyai_transcript_id: 91d722e6-8f59-4de9-91d3-8c9a3fbead38
---

## What Is The World? Sangha US 1 08 21 21

### Video


<p><iframe style="width:100%;" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/5SLpPCjKVNM?rel=0&amp;showinfo=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe></p>


### Transcript


**Speaker A:** It seems to be the way that we're raised, that you can imagine that a child would be raised, let us say, in the Deep South in the 1830s, to where the furthest way that he knows the extent of his world is as far as he can walk barefoot. This is actually what the world was like for tens of thousands of years during civilization, was how far can you walk. Well, guess what? You can walk from, let us say, from Persia to India, and they did. This was how Buddhism was spread. In fact, King Ashoka was well known to have spread The Dhamma, and we also see evidence of things popping up in Europe about that time, both in Greece and in Egypt. And so things do get spread around. But the way that the Buddhism has gotten spread to the West was done, let us say, in an ordinary way, that the ordinary always precedes the deeper stuff. In other words, we discovered fire as humans because of its natural occurring. It probably took us another 10 or 20 or 100,000 years to figure out actually how to produce or make fire, rather than just discover it when lightning or something did it for us. So this child that's isolated, his whole world is within 10 kilometers. This is basically true for all children, even in our society. The child's world is only as far as his mommy will drive him in the car. But when we get to school, we're giving a conceptualized world. We're giving globes and maps and lists of countries and lists of states. I mean, how many of you can name all of the states of the United States, all 50 of them? Probably not. I bet all 4 of you could sit down and list all 50 states, right? Take a while, but you can think them up. All right, look at the map and you can figure out— I mean, you could probably come up with almost all of them, or anyway. But how many of those states have each one of you been in? How many of you have been in all 50 states? Almost all 50. Only Eric, huh? Okay, because I'm missing a few. Idaho is one of the states that is missing. I have not been to Idaho. I just flew over it. You just flew over it, right? That don't count. Why? Because when you were in that airplane, your world was in that airplane. There was no Idaho there. Yeah. So flying over is just a concept. Okay, so this is the way that we begin to understand things, that when we were in— when we are in school, we have a real world that we live in substituted with an artificial conceptual world that is big and wide and only known because of the mind, that we don't see it, we don't touch it, we don't taste it, we don't smell it. It's not real for us. And this conceptualized world is then part of that concept, allows us to become confused about what we mean in Pali, because their world was a completely different world than the kind of world that we live in. So when they're thinking about the world and talking about the world in.

**Speaker B:** Pali.

**Speaker A:** We read the word "the world," and now we have a conceptualized world, not a real world. In fact, the Buddha actually talks about it in the sense of going from one world to the next can be done with your two feet, that you can in fact walk from India to Pakistan. And believe me, those are two different worlds. And that if you move from one world to the next, even in that regard, your Kamma begins to change. That you are not the same consciousness in New York than you are in Seattle. Kishon, you know already, just by going from Chicago to Washington State and being around Eric, your world has really changed. Without a doubt. Without a doubt. And not only that, but so I actually took a pit stop in New York, so it was even more dramatic. It was even more dramatic. Exactly. Robert can tell you about that too.

**Speaker B:** Oh boy, oh boy, it's quite the change.

**Speaker A:** What a relief.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, no kidding.

**Speaker A:** All right, so what I'm referencing here is the Sutta number 38, which in English is translated quite magically, that Sati, son of a fisherman, made the statement that it is consciousness that roams around experiencing the results of good and bad Kamma. And the Buddha says no, that consciousness is dependently arisen. Now, the point about that, this world and the next, going from one world to the other in the Pali, actually has— it has a term that is kind of like a pronoun in the sense that it says here and there. But his word to, uh, here and there would be the way that we would say it in English, but in, uh, uh, in the Pali is Tathagata, which means this or here, but it also means here over there. So this and this is the way that it's stated, but we would say it in English of here and there, and that is translated by, uh various translators, including Bhikkhu Bodhi, as this world and another world, as if it's putting in magic, rebirth. But the Buddha was pointing out that even if you go so far as to take it as the rebirth, you're missing the point, but our reincarnation, that the reality is, is that your consciousness changed just by changing location. The visual inputs and all of the stuff that you receive, and a lot of people don't recognize that, which means that they go from New York to Chicago and they don't recognize that they've made a big change here. New York is not Chicago. But worse still, people could come from New York and Chicago to Koh Phangan and they still think that they're in Chicago or New York. And that's what we mean when you've heard the phrase, "You can take the boy out of the country, but you can't take the country out of the boy." Well, yes, you can, but his consciousness has to change. And so that's the whole idea, that that's part of the problem with the issue of what is the world for you. You probably in Metta heard, uh, may all beings be happy, may all beings be free from suffering, may all beings this, may all beings be that. Okay, it's kind of wish fulfillment or wishing. It's almost like a prayer. That's probably the closest to a Buddhist prayer that you could actually get. Is may all beings be happy. Except generally that is taught in a meditation retreat where ain't nobody in that retreat all that happy. They're all getting together at a meditation session and they're wanting everybody to be happy when they can't even get that little group happy. Yeah, yeah, isn't that funny? Part of the reason for that is because they're living in a conceptualized world rather than seeing it as the world of the Buddha's world. The Buddha's world is the world of the senses. The Buddha's world is the world of your location. That's why we have the word location, and the word world in the Pali is the word for location, loka. Like Lokottara, being above the world. But if we are above the world that is a conceptualized world, then being on top of that world is a conceptualization also. However, there is a real world, and this is mentioned in the issue of the Six Points of the Compass. The six points of the compass are associated with the Metta practice in the sense of north, south, east, west, up and down. These are the six points of the compass. Now, in the West, when we use the word compass, we're talking about traveling long distances, going from one world to the next, going north. All right. But in the time of the Buddha, this whole point about the six points— in fact, they didn't even use the word compass. The word compass that they had was done by a translator who had the concept of a really, really vast world rather than a localized world. But the really, the six points of the compass are the people on my right are my friends, the people on my left are my family, the people who are in front of me are my business dealings and the people that I deal with in the day, and the people behind me are trying to stab me in the back. The ones above me are all the authority figures that I have created in my mind, which has to do with cops and priests and and presidents and anybody who's got more money than I do and all that kind of stuff. And then below me are the people who do things for me, like my servants. An example of that in our society would be guys who pump your gas if you're an organ, or table waiters at the restaurants, or fast food service, or clerks in the store, or tellers at the bank, these kind of people are doing a service for us. But basically, the lower, the higher, the front, the back, the left, the right has limits. That my limit of friends are the numbers that I can name. I know who's in my family, the people that I deal with on a regular basis. This is my world. You also have your own world, the world of all of the people. So when we're looking at being Metta in that regard, may all the beings that I actually have contact with. May they be happy, knowing that with 6 degrees of separation, that that will spread far enough. But it's not my job to make everybody happy. It's only my job to make the people in my world happy. But that's right here, right now. Yeah, well, that makes the job a whole lot easier. In fact, it puts it into the context that it can be done. If we have the job of 'may all beings be happy,' that's impossible. That's just a concept. But you can see that it got further deteriorated, that that's actually— 'may all beings be happy' is a very ordinary view. It's not noble at all. And that ordinary view, then by 500 years later, deteriorated into the Mahayana. And the Mahayana has the ideal of the Bodhisattva. Well, the Bodhisattva ideal is not only may all beings be happy like right now, but may all beings become fully enlightened before I become fully enlightened. You've heard that before, right? That's the Bodhisattva ideal. That's number one up there. Okay, that's her. As opposed to the original teaching of the Buddha, the ideal was the Arahant, the one who cleans out his own mind, who has enough joy that he can spread it in his world rather than the whole world. So that mentality of the whole world is, may all beings be happy, becomes the Bodhisattva ideal. May all beings be happy all the time, and until they're all happy all the time, I can't be happy. That's very, very much like— if you think about it, it's very much like, I want everybody to shut up so I can have some peace and quiet. And when you say it like that, it's not quite as compassionate or as joyful as, um, uh, the original teaching of the Buddha.

**Speaker B:** Oh, do you mind if I make a comment?

**Speaker A:** Go right ahead.

**Speaker B:** So thanks. So I was listening to The Art of Happiness at Work by the Dalai Lama. It's his sequel to The Art of Happiness. And he was asked at the end of the book, if you could be anything, if you had to be anything but the Dalai Lama, if you weren't allowed to be the Dalai Lama, what would you be? And he said, oh, I'd love to just go be alone in a forest somewhere. And that was exactly— but that's well known.

**Speaker A:** I mean, the Westerners have figured that out. But Dalai Lama, many, many years ago, did not want and tried to retire from being the Dalai Lama so that he could just be a dude.

**Speaker B:** I didn't know that.

**Speaker A:** He would— he would much rather just been a monk than the monk that is the target of the Chinese government.

**Speaker B:** Right.

**Speaker A:** Right, so that's an old story. So this guy who asked him that question recently is just really slow. He's probably under the age of 40.

**Speaker B:** Well, yeah, the book came out like 10, 15 years ago or something, so that's probably, probably why. But, um, yeah, and the other thing I was going to say is your point about Metta in person. I actually had an experience similar to that this week where I had to go back into Seattle for a few days to run an errand And so I was at my grandmother's for 2 days, and I wanted to get the hell out, I'll tell you that. But my mom and my grandma, you know, my grandmother is in a lot of pain. She has a lot of arthritis and that sort of a thing. So she can be very negative because of that. And it makes it, you know, requires extra Sati to be around her, I'll put it that way, to be happy around her. And it affects my mom too. So my mom becomes more negative because of this. So I had to really practice being joyful and happy when I was over there. And it helped them out, you know, it helped both of them out. They wanted me to stay longer. And I was like, no, I gotta go. But they were really happy to have me there, you know. So that was, that was a nice outcome, you know. So it's probably gone back to what it was, but it's a nice outcome.

**Speaker A:** Absolutely. And this comes from your knowledge and your practice of the teachings of the Buddha, that if you hadn't had those teachings, you would have been subject to their suffering and would have joined their pity party.

**Speaker B:** Well, it was great too, because I also even told my mom, I said, so she could help herself. I said, Mom, I can tell Granny is rubbing off on you a lot, you know. So if you just be positive and say something positive when she gets negative, or change the subject to something that is a positive subject, that can really help keep the spirits high. And she really appreciated that advice. So, which is what I was doing when I was there. And yeah, so I hope my mom's taken that advice. I hope. I'm not sure if she is or not, but she liked it when she heard it.

**Speaker C:** So that was good.

**Speaker A:** Yeah. One of the things that you're pointing out, Ben, the distinction between mom and granny. Let me ask you this question to help clarify this. Do you think 40 years ago your granny was as grumpy as she is now?

**Speaker B:** I doubt it, but I have no idea. Okay, I've personally noticed that she's gotten negative, more negative, as her arthritis has gotten really bad. So this is what I've noticed. So I assume no, but I don't know what it was like 40 years ago. It could have been whatever, you know, I have no idea.

**Speaker A:** But okay, yeah, this is, this is now well known in modern psychology. But the Buddha pointed it out very specifically, and that is, is that as we age, we get grumpy. In fact, there are movies called Grumpy Old Men, okay, a whole series of movies about it. And so this is— it's kind of well known that in old age people get grumpy, that in fact the politicians know this and can gain votes from grumpy people by being grumpy with them. There's a lot of manipulation going on with the grumpy, but the thing that we're really looking at is the fact that people in old age get grumpy. There's also the possibility that there are chemical buildups in the adrenal gland And it can— it has two chemicals that it produces, not only the chemical adrenaline, but also there's another chemical. I forgot the name of it, but cortisol doesn't break— pardon?

**Speaker B:** Is it cortisol?

**Speaker A:** Cortisol. That's correct. Cortisol does not break down as fast as adrenaline. Adrenaline is almost like instant energy. Is that in fact adrenaline, one of the key ingredients of adrenaline, of the molecule, is that it's got nitrogen in it. The cortisol, and that's part of the reason why it also breaks down so easily, that in fact adrenaline is nothing but a little kind of explosive energy packet to send all over the blood. And that's why we get kind of explosive when all this adrenaline is in the body, because it's designed for the fight or flight that we would have if there was real danger. And so the body is designed to handle real danger. But in our society, the dangers are almost always psychological or minimal. And yet we still have this fear mechanism built in. Well, this cortisol doesn't break down quite so easily as the adrenaline. And so as we're using adrenaline and pumping in cortisol, the adrenaline gets rotted away, but the cortisol stays over time and it builds up. And in fact, they notice that's also one of the major issues of old age is this cortisol building up and that this cortisol also has to do in some way or another. I guess somebody is going to do some research on it about why people get grumpy. I mean, there's got to be some sort of relationship in there with body chemistry. But the Buddha was very specific about old age is Dukkha. Why? Because we get really grumpy when we get old.

**Speaker B:** Do you think it has something to do with pain? Like, I know people report a lot of pains as they get older, uh, like they just have way more.

**Speaker A:** No, you could say that they have sensations, but because they've gotten grumpy, they call these new— these old sensations new pain. So It's not about whether— you see, pain is completely subjective. That if you tell somebody, I'm going to torture you, and then you're really gorilla-like and really convince them that what you're doing is torture, even when you just touch them.

**Speaker B:** You know, it's funny because it also goes the other way.

**Speaker A:** Yes, exactly.

**Speaker B:** Like if someone tells you, yeah, if someone tells you this is going to feel really good, then you're more likely to think it's going to feel good. And also if someone tells you they're really great at something, you're more likely to think they're really good at it, even if they're not, you know. And so I've noticed that, you know.

**Speaker A:** This is actually called bedside manner. There's a word for it.

**Speaker B:** Yeah.

**Speaker A:** Okay. Yeah. How does the doctor behave besides his patient? The doctor's attitude has a lot to do with how bad the person's going to feel, because the doctor is an authority figure for them. He becomes their adult ego or their parent ego state. And if he's nurturing to them, then his patients are going to feel nurtured and happy and alive. And then he can stick them with the biggest horse needle in town. But if the doctor is grumpy and he comes in and just says, turn your butt over, I've got something, I got a surprise for you, then even a little prick is going to be received in great pain. Okay, so that's just one of 10,000 examples that pain is subjective. Another— here's one. Somebody can step on a nail, put a puncture in their foot, go for days with kind of ignoring it, walking on that foot and everything like that, until it really gets bad. They go to the doctor and the doctor says, oh my goodness, this is a big problem. Now the foot starts to hurt a lot. That's another example of the doctor talking somebody into feeling really painful when in fact they were walking on that foot with the hole in it just fine until they go to the doctor with it, and now all of a sudden it's a big deal.

**Speaker B:** You know how soldiers are trained to endure torture and things like that?

**Speaker A:** Like, you know, that's the training.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, yeah, yeah. But like, you know, like they're supposed to endure— like a Navy SEAL learns, like, you know, endure like really horrible pain and all of this. Do you know what kind of— do you think maybe they use a little bit of Dhamma, you know, in enduring that? How do you think they endure that?

**Speaker A:** I would go in an opposite direction and say, no, some Dhamma folks use that psychological thing. And the place where I could say that it's used would be in Goenka's method called the strong determination sitting. You probably heard about it. I did it a lot. OK, just sitting for an hour without opening your eyes, opening your hands, or opening your legs, whatever the body is going to do, you just deal with it. OK. And the idea then is that while you're going through that, there's the loudspeaker of some Goenka tape or whatever telling you to never mind, start again, or to look at look at the sensation. And what it— what really happens is, is that if you're looking at a sensation that you had considered and talked to yourself and thought of as pain, and you begin to look at it very closely, where is that? Where does it hurt the worst? Okay, I've got, say, a whole kneecap here, a whole knee that's hurting. Where is the central focus point of the pain? Where does it hurt the most? And guess what? You can't find such a place. If you think it's there and you look there, no, it hurts worse over here. So let me go over here. And you begin to look around and you say, wait a minute, there is really no pain. There is only sensation that is pain because I don't like it. Now, this is a major wake-up for a lot of people to wake up to the fact that a lot of what they thought was pain was not pain at all. And so that there's an advantage to these strong determination sittings. But the Bhikkhu Buddhadasa and I talked to that and says that it's got too many disadvantages to it because a lot of people don't in fact come to that state. That how many strong determination sittings did I have to do before I finally figured out that I can sit here joyfully including all of this stuff that's making the body intentionally uncomfortable, to where the Buddha talks about making the body comfortable, relaxed. Now, the translators, when they see that, they say, wait a minute, we've got to have something really big here. You can't just be relaxed and comfortable, you've got to be tranquil. But when I hear the word tranquilized, I think of lions and tranquilizer guns and big darts, and then the lion is completely out of it. That's tranquilized. OK, so I don't think that tranquilized is the right word to use, but relaxed works really well and relaxed and comfortable. That's the state that we're looking for, not this state of putting ourselves in a state of torture so that we can handle torture, that actually handling torture is a skill to be developed, but it's a skill that one does not normally need in life, especially when we have a comfortable, easy, wise— with our wisdom, we plan on inhabiting comfort. But I would say that there are groups of people that I would recommend the strong determination sittings for. The two groups: One would be CIA agents. Even now, the CIA agents are not being tortured in Afghanistan, but CIA agents who are going to be tortured, subject to torture, it would be good for them to be able to sit in that torturous setting and smile and make friends with his torturers. But he's unable to do that if he's in great pain and he hates the pain, and therefore he hates the guy who's giving him the pain. Therefore, he's hating the torturers. But if he has the idea of, oh, I've been through more torture than this just by sitting on the floor, you guys have got nothing here, can't touch me, I can handle this too. That in fact this is where Bhikkhu Buddhadasa talks about it in the sense of that sickness is a good opportunity for practice, that there's no reason to intentionally torture yourself in order to get yourself into a position of handling stress and pain, that that will come in life. The question is, is when it does come up naturally on its own, can you handle it then? And that will make you even tougher for later. Because guess what? Things are going to get really tough for you four. Things are really going to get tough. It's called old age. And you'll be lucky, very lucky, if you have to endure the torture of old age. Why? Because the only way to not suffer is to die early. So you're going to actually, by having old age, or by living long, you're going to do most of it old. Make sure that you're not building up a bunch of cortisol so that you're going to be grumpy old men. You can be happy old men instead, because that kind of thing is coming. That's something— that's a promise. When we say Dukkha is old age, sickness, and death, the Buddha is actually promising you're going to get sick, you're going to get old. Then in fact, if you get old enough, you're guaranteed to be sick. But eventually going to die, that there has been no cases of anybody not. Everybody dies. If Jesus was really resurrected, he should be operating the church right now. I mean, what's the point of dying on a cross and then being resurrected only to just float up into heaven again already anyway? I mean, what's the point about a second trip home? Which brings us to the second group of people who I would recommend strong determination settings, and that is the ones who go into self-torture. Self-flagellation. You know, there is a few dudes that take these giant, giant big fish hooks, the biggest ones, the ones that are about this big, and they'll take one of those hooks and they'll wrap it around their rib cage so that they've got a couple of ribs there, tie a rope to that fish hook and dangle themselves from a tree just to prove that they can do it. The only way that they can do this is with some sort of strong determination practice, being able to sustain pain. OK, another example of that would be to join the Mafia. You've got to sign your contract in blood, and then you have to hold it while they take that piece of paper and burn it in your hands. And you've got to hold that piece of paper in your hands while this burned. They've got a different style in the jacuzzi in Japan. They just want your little finger. Yeah, all right. And but you got to do it yourself.

**Speaker B:** Wow, God, aren't the Yakuza so nice? Just a little finger, huh?

**Speaker A:** Yeah, all it takes to join the jacuzzi is a little finger. You gotta chop it off yourself and hand it to them. Easy stuff. Well, that's the question, because you see people from time to time that are really, really tough, and they want to prove that they're really tough by holding a burning piece of paper in their hand or cutting a finger off or something like this. So you see, I mean, the movies are built upon tough guys. These guys are our heroes. Without recognizing that, hey, they went through a training to do that. They probably were beat up pretty bad when they were a kid, but they got over it, and they know that they got over it, so they can go get beat up again.

**Speaker B:** You know, I think this is actually a really important topic because this is another thing society tells you, which is that the way to overcome pain is just be really tough and stoic, you know, and That's not what the Dharma says, you know.

**Speaker A:** No, no, you're right there, but I wouldn't say that society teaches that. Let us say that older society taught that, but the new modern society tells you to take a pill to avoid your pain, to let's do some chemical things so that you don't have to feel the pain, rather than Recognizing that it's not pain, it's just— it's pain because I don't like it. I call it pain when in fact it's just a sensation, it's just a tickling. Sure. One of the trainings that I have gone through, and I find it kind of amusing now, and that is foot tickling. And normally you need this with a with a friend, and we normally do it with girlfriends, that if you tickle your girlfriend's foot, she'll probably try to tickle yours. And that's the invitation. So can you have your foot tickled without having any reaction to it at all, either mentally or autonomically? In other words, can you hold your foot there while it's being tickled? Without jumping. Okay, that's part of the training that we can do, and that's a whole lot easier training, by the way, than sticking your foot with the knife and holding it still. You don't need to do that. Just start with tickling first and try to control the mind and control the sensations of having your foot tickled and whatnot, so that you can build up This mental strength, the mental strength. Pardon? That's a really great point that I've never even thought of before. Tickling. Yeah, tickling your foot. Another one which is actually quite brilliant, and this is actually necessary in the tropics. The Thai people, for instance, because they know that their children don't have the mind, the mentality to do it, they always cut the fingernails very, very short. Here in Thailand. And the reason that they cut them short is to keep people from scratching, because there's a lot of insects. I mean, the tropics are full of insects. There are probably more insects in this house right here than there are humans in the United States. I know because I've gotten bitten by each one of them. And so don't scratch. This is the next part, is to be mindful enough that you don't scratch. It's a good idea to keep ointment around so that when you— if you have an itch, that is a sensation, and the sensation is an itch, and we generally don't like it. Right. And so what we do is automatically out of the reptilian brain that controls that, we scratch at it. Always making it worse. A much better thing to do is always do it wisely and mindfully and have some ointments. This is the kind of stuff that we have here in Thailand, but it's really just— it's just a grease with a lot of eucalyptus and wintergreen and all of that kind of stuff in it.

**Speaker B:** Oh, is that Tiger Balm?

**Speaker A:** Yeah, it's the same thing as Tiger Bomb.

**Speaker B:** I love Tiger Bomb.

**Speaker A:** Monkey Bomb. Those are the kind of words. I don't know what this one has because it's all in Thai language that I don't read. But surprisingly enough, it's made by Bayer.

**Speaker C:** Oh wow.

**Speaker B:** But as you can see, my dog, he's running around. Oh, he just stopped. Oh wait, there he goes.

**Speaker A:** Ah, oh, he's having fun. Yes, chasing his tail. Excellent.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, yeah, he's having a good time.

**Speaker A:** Well, he has more room to run than he did in the apartment in New York, so I imagine.

**Speaker C:** He was really happy.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, he is. He's having a great time.

**Speaker A:** So back to the point about the scratching, and that is to make the determination that you're— if you catch yourself scratching anything, stop immediately. And then decide, are you going to nourish this thing with ointment? Are you going to continue to scratch it with the critical mind? That we don't like that itch, and so we scratch it, making things worse. Or are you going to have the presence of mind, just like the, the, uh, the tickling of the foot? Do you have the presence of mind to hold your foot and keep it still while it's being tickled? Do you have the presence of mind to keep your grubby mitts off of that itch and put a balm on it instead? These are little techniques that are really ways of putting in practice the Dharma in small ways that require mindfulness. There's other things that you can do. An example of that: every one of us has small quirks, idiosyncrasies, or individual habits. If you can identify your own individual quirks and habits, then you can start to change that intentionally. One of the examples of it would be to keep your hands away from your face unless you're doing it consciously, that you don't touch the face because of habit. That whatever you're doing now, you begin to do it with a mind that is alert and watching what you're doing. So this is a practice that actually is putting the Dhamma out into real life. And so the Buddha talks about it in the Satipatthana Sutta in the sense of stretching and reaching, grasping, touching, whatever the hands are doing. Do it consciously. Start paying attention to what's going on with the body right here, right now. And by doing that, we begin to alter those habits. There is a particular gesture that is sometimes the phrase "arms akimbo." has various definitions. One of them means that the arms are flailing about, but another most specifically is that you've got your fist balled up and you've got your arms or your hands on your hips and you're holding this kind of posture. Right. This also, that's the most specifically the issue of arms akimbo. Guess what? In the Vinaya, In the Patti monk, there is that rule of arms akimbo. The monk does not go around with his arms akimbo. What that means is, is he knows what his hands and arms are doing, that he's not flailing about, that he's not holding aggressive postures. When I was like a kid.

**Speaker B:** Uh.

**Speaker A:** Like one of my cousin's friends was like, tell him to take his hands off his hips. Say that again. Tell him what? Because I have my hands on my hips like that. I was probably like holding my hips like this. He was like, tell him to take his hands off his hips, right? That's noticeable. It is in fact a message. Yeah. Go ahead.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, I had this— there was this girl I worked with and she would tell me how this one guy who was much older than her, a manager, would always come up to talk with her with his hands akimbo like that, like just, you know, his chest strutted forward, just his hands right there. And she'd be like, how do I even interact with this guy? Because he does this every time. Every time he wants to talk to me.

**Speaker A:** Well, it's pretty clear message that he wants something, isn't it? And she knows what he wants. Yeah, or at least she's got a big idea about what he wants.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, yeah, it was, it was awkward for her.

**Speaker A:** All right, so, um, in a, in a larger respect, that means that we begin to notice the body's posture. An example of that, there's an old video someplace, and I think that it has— I don't even remember the people's names, but one of them was a monk, and I think it was either Bhante Vilamaramsi or it was The one in Australia, not the abbot, but anyway, that and another Westerner who was not a monk but well known, and that the monk was actually speaking about.

**Speaker B:** A.

**Speaker A:** Lot of reincarnation, rebirth kinds of stuff. And I remember who it was, it wasn't the Westerner's name, it wasn't Lee Brassington, it was the other guy.

**Speaker C:** Who.

**Speaker A:** Had written— Anyway, sorry about that, old minds get broken, that's part of the situation. I guess that's part of the grumpiness, is when we can't remember things. And I'm losing names right now. In this talk, we would expect, because of the books that he's written, that the Westerner non-monk would be defending the teachings of the Buddha that he knows. That in fact, this guy was the one who wrote the book of Buddhism Without Beliefs, and I can't remember the guy's name. I know who you're talking about.

**Speaker B:** Stephen Batchelor.

**Speaker A:** That's the guy. That's him. Okay, so this is an interview. With Stephen Batchelor, and in Australia they have a group of monks that came out of the Ajahn Chah group. But unlike— pardon?

**Speaker B:** Bodhinyana, that's John Brahm's monastery.

**Speaker A:** Yeah, Ajahn Brahm, that's right. Okay, so one of the monks that was there is named Ajahn Brahmali. It was Ajahn Brahmali who is really, really big time into rebirth, reincarnation, very magical, and that Stephen Baxter was there. But Stephen Baxter would not confront him or ask him any questions to guide this thing back to noble. Stephen Baxter just kind of went right along with everything that this guy was saying. But the thing that was quite remarkable was that the monk behaved in a very, very agitated way. His arms were akimbo, he was moving all around, he would change his posture, he just couldn't sit there, but Stephen Batchelor could actually just sit in a chair and have a dialogue in front of an audience being taped, and he could sit. But this monk was all over the place. And I found that that was quite amusing, and it may have been that he was expecting Steve Batchelor to confront him on his stuff, and Stephen didn't confront him, which left him in a state of agitation, expecting to be confronted at every minute, and he never got confronted, and so he remained agitated. That was very unusual, I thought. And that video is out there. But basically what we're talking about is part of the monk's training is to train the body so that we do not appear agitated because we're not agitated. And yet this monk who is defending rebirth and reincarnation is really agitated. So that's one of the ways that, as an observation, when you're watching the video, is observe the postures of the people who were talking, to see how much movement that they do, how much agitation that they have. Can they just sit there, or are they all over the place? If they can just sit there, that's because they've been practicing Sati, mindfulness of the body, looking at what the body is doing. That's actually step 3 of Anapanasati, is to experience what the body is doing. Not this body scanning stuff that Goenka was talking about, starting at the top of the head and moving around. I mean, that has its value to it, but really, one who is practicing that doesn't necessarily develop the skill of actually watching what the body is doing. But that's why we talk about that. I haven't actually talked to students very often about it, but about waking up to watch what the body is doing, whenever we can remember. A good example of that is when you're opening doors, or when you're beginning to open a package or something like that. In fact, because of the COVID virus, we get a lot of stuff through the mail, we buy stuff through Lazada. So one of the habits that I've gotten into is a very, very stylized way of opening the packages. Most specifically, here's an example, I think, here to where this package was opened this way. It wasn't torn, but a knife was taken at the end of it to just open the package. You can see the knife slot. Right there. So this is the way to start training the mind so that you pay attention to everything that we're doing, even putting the hands back together, holding them in a posture. So this is part of the training that we could do, is just mindfulness of the body, part of Anapanasati practice. And you can do that at any point in time, and you can be riding a subway. What are you doing with your hands? If you're carrying a package, notice how you're carrying it. What are you doing with your hands? Is it— go ahead.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, I have a question. So it's a little bit unrelated, but I think it's a good question. So I'm curious to hear your thoughts.

**Speaker A:** So you don't have to announce your questions. You could just ask.

**Speaker B:** I have a question coming from the Moon. It's the King of the Third Province of the— whatever. Okay. All right, don't worry. Anyway, so one thing I found with the Dhamma, you know, in general, is that, you know, it clearly works, you know, it's clearly great and all of this, yet there's still this tendency to return to the thoughts of the society, you know, the society kind of point of view, you know. And I notice it's a lot better in seclusion, obviously, but nonetheless, the tendency still exists. Yet I know it's wrong. I know it creates Dukkha, you know, to do this. Yet I still will lapse into it.

**Speaker A:** Well, and hating it is even more Dukkha.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, yeah, totally.

**Speaker A:** Recognize it and then like yourself or love yourself for the fact that you can be— you can see how— and you can see, that's the joy. The joy is that you can see how much society has affected you.

**Speaker B:** Right.

**Speaker A:** Because only by having it with joy can you say, wait a minute, I can do something about that. But normally the thought is, oh, poor me, I'm stuck in that trap. I've got it, I can't get out of it. Okay, poor me. The attitude then is the attitude of the victim or the attitude of the winner. If you're going to have the attitude of the winner, then that means that you're very happy to see all of that stuff when it comes up, right? That's the trick, is to be joyful with what you see, because only by seeing it can you have a choice about whether you're going to change it or not.

**Speaker B:** Sure.

**Speaker A:** And if you live in society, you've got to at least know how they think. There's a big difference between someone who has left the world after 15 or 20 years, gone into seclusion, getting his mind straightened out, and coming back, versus someone who just has his mind straightened out and comes into society for the first time. He's lost. That's the problem with the issue of the beginner's mind. There's a catch-22 or a problem issue built in into this. In the sense that the Buddha is talking about, be here now and see things the way that they are. And in a way, you can't see the way that things are now if you don't understand anything. And if you are always with the beginner's mind, that means you've got no Samskara built up and you have no knowledge of basis of all. So you don't have a clue about what's happening. So there's got to be a balance in there. There's got to be a middle path. That we have to know how society works in order to avoid the worst parts of it. So congratulate yourself for knowing and understanding society rather than crapping on yourself because you keep having thoughts about society.

**Speaker B:** Cool.

**Speaker A:** It's not about can you have— can you remove thoughts of society from your mind? The question is, is can you have wholesome thoughts about your thoughts about society? Sure, you cannot just stop the mind. So scientists know that, philosophers know that, uh, Arahants know that. The only people who haven't, uh, figured that out are the ones who are reading Dharma books, and somehow they get the idea that they're supposed to stop the mind. I don't think that you'd really want to stop the mind. Can you imagine the mind completely stopping while you're asleep at night? What's going to keep the heart going? What's going to keep your respiration? I mean, if the mind stops, you're going to die. But we do have some control over how we spend each mind moment. If we can remember that we have a choice about each mind moment. And so when you catch your mind in the, let us say, in-worldly thought, then we can analyze that, not because it's a worldly thought or not, but because is it wholesome or not? Which also has then to do with, well, how big is your world? Is your world merely a conceptualized world, or is this something that's real? Because normally, when we think of the world, or we're thinking about how to do things, which basically becomes a conceptualized world— I mean, how many different rules have we made? And all of these rules are just conceptualizations. Not actions. So when we, um, recognize that the mind is doing concepts— it's been doing concepts, it's going to continue to do concepts. You cannot survive in this society that is built upon concepts without using concepts. But there's two things. So One, the beginning meditator, the one who's reading the book, says, "Oh, because I understand concepts, therefore I'm going to stop having concepts," and they can't do it, and so they get frustrated. But another way of dealing with it is, "Okay, I've got concepts, but I know I've got concepts, and that I can control whether these conceptualizations are wholesome or not." recognizing that almost all critical thinking is conceptualizations, based upon a set of rules about how things should be, rather than about the reality of how things really are. And it is a great joy to know the difference between those two, because it takes some evaluation. To recognize what concepts are versus what reality is, because we were never taught that when we were children. We could actually go so far as to bring in the Buddhist point in the Sutra No. 12 called "The Lion's Roar." This is a very interesting sutra, we ought to do a whole talk on it sometime. But the first item on the list of features of the Buddha. The number one item on the list is that the Buddha knows the difference between what is possible and what is impossible. For us, we could go so far as to say we could rephrase that into know the difference between what is real and what is a concept. To know the difference between what's possible and what's not possible, if we're a conceptualization, That's an ideal, or a 'should,' or something, and things are not really like that. That's not real; it's not really possible, because if it were, things would already be that way. And if Christianity really worked, then all of the Christians would all be free from sin, but they're not. So freedom from sin for the Christians is nothing but a concept. For the Dhamma dude, however, It can be a reality, because we've got the right tools. So, the toolset and the skill systems are part of the package of what's possible and what's not possible. That some things are completely, totally impossible, and will remain so for a long time, until the tools are developed for that. For instance, uh, pulse, like on Star Trek, wormholes, pulse, pulse engines, impulse, impulse engines like on Star Trek, right? Those are impossible. That's only a concept, doesn't really exist in the real world. This is okay. But a lot of stuff is like that. Like seeing a drop-dead gorgeous girl and I want her. Guess what? For me, she's impossible. And if I know she's impossible, then I would go to the point of saying, well, I don't want it anyway. Sour grapes and all of that. If it's impossible, recognize that it's impossible. Don't chase things that we can't have. So, this goes back to that issue of torture and strong determination sittings and that kind of stuff, that we can train with the skills so that one person can do things that no one else can do. For him, it's possible to hang by his ribs with a fishhook. From the limb of a tree. But for 7 other billion people, that's impossible. You can't do it. You haven't trained for it. Guess what? This guy that we know of that can do that, he's got that hole in his ribs that he's kept open so that he can keep putting that fishhook back in the same hole and do his trick over and over again. There's also a guy in Thailand, and I think that he's— the remarkable part is, is that he's in Thailand, but it's also a part of the Hindu thing. It started, I guess, with the idea of the bone in the nose, you know, in primitive society with the bone in the nose. Well, if you can get a bone in the nose, then why not a dagger in the jaw. And maybe a dagger in the jaw comes out, the dagger comes out on the other side of the jaw. And then maybe two daggers. And maybe now a French kicking knife. And how about a meat cleaver? And this guy's now, he's got so many knives in his cheeks that he looks great, big fanned out like that with all the handles and all the blades. And there's a photo of this guy, he's from Thailand, and he can do this. But his face looks ridiculous without all those knives. I mean, you think about how ugly it looks with those knives in his face. His face looks pretty ugly without them too. Like a fish. But he's good with it. He makes money off of it. This is his living. And so he's gotten used to the sensations of having knives in his cheeks, just like you could get used to having a bone through your nose. Arm. One can get used to having a broken rib that never heals. That's quite common, in fact, because, you know, if you have a broken arm, you can set it. How are you going to set a broken rib? I know, because I broke a rib in 1990 and it's still broken. Still broken. You can see it in the X-ray because they X-rayed it several years ago. But the real issue about it is, is I know that it's broken because it pops from time to time, and sometimes it gets itself into position to where it gives a very interesting sensation that many people would call intense pain. But I've learned that there's a way to pop it back into place, and it hasn't popped out of place now for several years, so maybe it's starting to heal. But normally if I pull my arm up like that, it'll pop back into shape, and if that doesn't happen, then I can grab a hold of something very high and pull right down on it, and that will pop the other thing back into place. In fact, there was one time I was driving the truck and it popped out, giving severe pain, and I took the handle there above the door and started pulling on it. One of my students was in the truck with me back at Watsonville Mochi Days, and he was really surprised to see what I was doing. I said, "Well, I'm just popping a bone back into place." So this is what life is like. Well, I mean, we can get used to things in the sense of learning to manage it, easy enough. But as they arise. Pardon? But as they arise. As they arise, right. I don't have to worry about, oh, poor me, this thing hurts. No, it just hurts right now. Let me do something right now to get out of the pain.

**Speaker B:** So in the determination sittings with Goenka, if a lot of pain came up, would you just note it, pain, and do the noting thing? Like, how do you deal with that in the moment?

**Speaker A:** Well, it depends upon the student and their level of skill and their level of wisdom at that time. An example for almost everyone would be that if it hurts, stop doing it. Like the old joke that the guy goes into the doctor and he says, "Doctor, doctor, every time I stab my arm with this knife, it hurts." The doctor says, 'Stop stabbing your arm with the knife.' So that's the way of the training then, is that in the beginning you did not expect any of the students— the first hour that they tried a strong determination sitting, none of the students can do it. It becomes a contest between the students sometimes. Of who's going to blink first or who's going to move first, except that you got to have your ears open because your eyes are closed. You can't tell, but you can if you're very sensitive. You can tell when other people are moving around in that strong determination setting, and it becomes a contest. Okay, so that's one phase. If I can do it even if he can't— so, but that's— it's got some ego built into that until we drop that part of it too. So there's a lot of stuff that goes into that strong determination sitting, but there's less painful ways of getting the mind strong. And you could think of the strong determination sitting for most meditators should not be done in their first 10-day course. That's very much like somebody, a weakling, that gets a gym membership. He walks into the gym and he goes right over to the 400-pound dumbbells, and he works it. He can't get it off the floor. Okay, he needs to go do something that he can do so that he can get some training. And when he gets some training, he'll get stronger. And when he gets stronger, now he can jerk 400.

**Speaker C:** Pounds.

**Speaker B:** So what would maybe the strong attitude be to break the pain down into a bunch of mind moments and then just analyze, or just let them combine non-judgmentally?

**Speaker A:** They were already broken down to mind moments. It was the mind that had collected them together to make a little pain now and a little pain now and a little pain now, and we add all that up and say it's a great big pain. No, it was just one little pain then, and another little pain then, and then another little pain then. And I can handle that pain, I can handle that one, and I can handle that, but I can't handle the whole crowd. Except that the point is, is that the whole crowd is the concept.

**Speaker B:** Yep.

**Speaker A:** But the reality is, is they're just one pain right now. And the reality is, is that it's not a pain, but it's a pain because we call it a pain because we don't like it. But we can also develop the attitude of, "Hey, I can handle this," and that, "Hey, I can handle this," then almost has a joy built into it of, "Look how strong my mind is that I can handle that little sensation of the kneecap.".

**Speaker B:** And then your attention is on the "I can handle this" instead of the pain, and then the pain is gone.

**Speaker A:** Exactly. The pain is gone because we're not seeing it as pain anymore. We're seeing it as a challenge that I can meet. I could do this no matter how obstructed the mind gets with the pain. I can throw that pain out of the mind and be satisfied with the fact that I can handle the sensation that I was calling pain. And it doesn't matter how intense the sensation is. What matters is your attitude about that particular sensation at that particular time.

**Speaker B:** And then the next thought that might come up is, oh, I don't want to do this forever. But then you throw that out and say, I'm just— I can do this right now.

**Speaker A:** I can do this right now. That's the reason why people commit suicide, is because they are conceptualized that all the bad feelings and pain that they have right now are getting bigger and bigger and bigger over time, where in fact, no, they just feel bad this moment, then they feel bad the next moment, and then they feel bad the next moment. And the great big pain that they have is all conceptualized pain. But can I handle this pain? Can I handle this moment? Can I do this one? That's the right attitude. The answer is yes, I can handle this pain. That I don't have to add this pain to all of the other conceptualized pain and make the pain grow beyond what actually is the sensation of the moment. That's an important point. Thanks for mentioning that, Robert, because we do conceptualize our pain. That in fact, the pain that you don't like right now is only a concept, because the reality of the situation is all 5 of us are feeling pretty good right now. No, no pain here. Everything is okay.

**Speaker B:** Sure.

**Speaker A:** And so that's the way they begin to see it. Oh, I can handle that. I mean, everything is fine. Yeah, so the knee hurts. So what? Knees hurt. They have a habit. That's why there's got sensation machinery built into the knees, so that they can give you a message. And the message is, hey man, we need to do something about this. And the answer is, no, I'm not going to do something about it. I have a strong mind. Or we can sit there, oh, poor me, it hurts. But I've got to do this meditation because Goenka told me to, or it's supposed to be good for me, or some other conceptualized reason of why we sit there rather than the reasoning of, hey man, I can handle that. That's nothing. But Bhikkhu Buddhadasa has a completely different position. He has the position of the doctor: "Hey, if your leg hurts, then move your leg to get it to a position where it's comfortable." Because it really is a whole lot easier to deal with a strong mind that is not so heavily challenged, because some of these sensations are quite a challenge. And so don't challenge yourself until you're ready for that challenge. Only, let us say, only play games that you know you can win. And when you get tired of playing games that you know that you can win and you keep winning all the time, then you're going to stop playing games. It's only when we play and we lose and we win and we lose and we win and we say, okay, I'll win, I'll I'll win, I hope I'll win, and all that. In fact, the scientists have been able to see that with monkeys, in the sense of teaching the monkey various things, but in the beginning, all the monkey had to do was push a button. Now they've got it really sophisticated to see, can the monkeys count? In other words, if you show them two different boxes, this box has four objects this box has 5 objects and the monkey has to press the bar for 5, because 5 is bigger, he'll get a treat. OK, they've done that kind of thing. But just in the beginning, when the screen lights up or when the thing happens, the screen is on, the monkey will push the button, he'll get food. They do this with the training over and over again, like the dog. You train the dog by giving him a reward for doing what he's told to do. We do that with the mind. We reward our own mind for waking up to the pain in the leg, but I can handle it. OK, and so that's kind of a reward. We give ourselves a delicious reward. But back to the monkeys now. They have recognized that if they do it by having some intermittency in there so that the monkey presses twice, and he gets 2 rewards. Then he presses the 3rd time, no reward. He presses it again, 4th time, he gets the reward. It begins to get random. But as it begins to get random, the monkeys start pressing the bar more often, and pretty soon they get it to the point that no food comes out. And there the monkey is just pressing all the time. They've trained the monkey to press that bar hoping to get something that never comes. I call that American society. Here we have all of these monkeys pressing their buttons and they never get the reward that they're expecting to get. So we press those buttons thinking that we're going to get a reward, and we, we continue to do that. This is, this is called learned behavior. That we were rewarded for that behavior at one time, and so we continued to do it, and then we continued to do it even after the rewards were no longer there. And in fact, when I was studying psychology at University of Michigan, there was kind of a joke going around, and the joke was that they had done a rat maze, a big one. I mean, this is a university, so they got this giant rat maze, and they would time how long it took for the rats to get to the cheese. As a learning thing so that some of the rats could learn their way right through to the cheese and do it. You know, so they start off and they're doing it in 5 minutes and then down to 2 minutes and then down to just lickety-split, going 30 seconds to go from the beginning. And so they said, well, let's build a really, really big maze that is exactly like this, except that we're going to have students, university students, go through the maze and we can time them. 2. And they did the experiment, and then they closed the— after they did all the research, they closed the experiment down, but they left the maze there. But for the humans, while they were doing it, they would, instead of paying a piece of cheese, they'd put a $5 bill. This is back in the '70s, so $5 bills meant something back then. Maybe nowadays you'd have to put a $20 in there, and then the kids will go through it to get to $20. But the joke is, is that even after they closed the experiment down, that building that it was in, they kept getting broken into often because the kids would go back to that maze to run that maze to get their $20 bill or their $5 bill. And then the whole thing was closed down. Yeah, that's human behavior. You know, even after the experiment is over, we continue to perform the way that we were told to do it. We train ourselves into doing things that are absolutely of no value at all. Ah, David Goldman. I don't know David Goldman.

**Speaker C:** Somebody— Devin Goodman.

**Speaker A:** Devin. Okay, can you get Doug— could somebody invite him into our.

**Speaker B:** Um, Um, I'll message him right now. I'll just, um, he asked when the calls were, right?

**Speaker A:** And, uh, yeah, you can invite him in on it right now because it didn't go according to plan.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, Devin Goodman. Okay, I'm calling him and he's not picking up.

**Speaker A:** Um. That's okay. Yeah, we had several people who wanted to join, but they, uh, we'll have to find out what's going on with Skype. Since Kishan set it up, I'm hoping that maybe he can do something about it. Okay, so Devin has joined.

**Speaker B:** Oh yeah, that's great. Oh, Arhat, welcome.

**Speaker A:** Hello, hello, Devin. I see a box for you, but I don't see your face yet. Oh well, yeah, we've been going since 9 this morning, so, um, we've been at it more than an hour. First things we talked about were getting the thing going and what we were going to do, moving it to Skype or whatever, but we found doing it this way. Whatever we do, I'll send it out so that we can— I'm hoping we can get that Sangha group going. Brilliant. But I don't know what to do about it because I didn't see a way of starting a call. So anyway, we have been talking about strong determination sittings and getting the mind really strong, but doing it on things that are possible to do. That if we do something that's Another example of that, by the way, is that when I was learning to play the piano, I kept hearing music that was played by better musicians than I, and I was jealous. And so, I'm tired of playing my chopsticks, I want to play your Chopin, I want to play your Beethoven, and I couldn't do it! Because I didn't have the skills, it was an impossibility for me, which in a way meant that I was wasting my time and I'm not learning to play the piano correctly, which means to be able to eventually learn those pieces. But I also wasn't learning to play the music that I was capable of playing, because I was trying to play music that I couldn't play. And so that realization hit home really hard when I was a teenager. That's a hard lesson to learn, is what is possible and what is impossible. Did Devin leave? He did. Devin, are you still there?

**Speaker B:** It looks like he dropped off. Oh, um, maybe I'll jump back in. We'll see.

**Speaker A:** Well, anyway, I think that we've had, um, quite a long call, uh, talking about strong determination settings, what is possible, getting the skills developed. But really, one of the ways of developing that skill is by intentionally remembering to pay attention to what the body is doing. This is especially useful not sitting on the floor squatting and doing something that we're calling meditation, but rather that we were living our lives. And while you're out living your lives, what are your hands doing? Yeah, that. I was waiting for somebody to do something. To start paying attention to the positions of the body, the arms akimbo, or the wiggling foot. The agitations. But in fact, you can see a crowd of people all agitated when they're waiting for something, like waiting for a train, waiting for a bus, waiting for a doctor's appointment, something like that. When you have a whole visa office, that's a really, really intense place where everybody is really agitated at a visa office. But we also see that at airports, everybody is really agitated at an airport. And you know that you're agitated because you can see all of this unnecessary fidgeting behavior. So if we can see that in other people, then that means that other people can see it in us if they're looking. And if they can see it, we can too. And so beginning to look at what the body is doing is a kind of a wake-up for most of us. Go ahead.

**Speaker B:** Question. Yeah, so if you have, say, an itch, like for example, like right now I have an itch right here, is a more skillful way of dealing with that to just notice it and just allow it and be like, okay, this is fine, you know, not itch it, not scratch it? Or is it more skillful to scratch the itch?

**Speaker A:** No, it's more skillful to have ointment around so that you can nourish that wound, that mosquito bite or whatever, nourish it with medication.

**Speaker B:** And let's say you don't have that.

**Speaker A:** Then go get it because you're going to have mosquito bites, you're going to have scratches. You need to have some medication. That's one of the prerequisites, is to have adequate medication so that you don't go around doing things that are not appropriate without the medication. Yes, having the right medication, that's the good thing to do so that you— because there's going to be scratches and bumps and scrapes on the body surface on a regular basis. You're out there using the body, it's going to come in contact, and things are finding the body quite delicious, especially when you're in the tropics. Human bodies are very, very delicious. They're especially delicious if you've been eating bananas.

**Speaker B:** Really?

**Speaker A:** Why? Because bananas have potassium. And that they have found that mosquitoes, though they are attracted to the carbon dioxide, if you have 5 or 6 people sitting around, a whole lot of carbon dioxide is coming out. The mosquitoes know where that is. But the one that they find the most delicious in that group is the one who is having the bananas. But I learned that the hard way at Wat Soan Mokkh. At 6 o'clock every evening at Mere Patum's house, there was an open Sangha meeting where coffee and drinks, chai, would be served, and Ajahn Po would show up. And so that meant that everybody would come. But Mere Patun always had bananas out for those who were, you know, because Ajahn Po and the monks are not going to eat any bananas, but the Westerners who were there and didn't know what was going on, they would have the bananas. They're the ones who then attract the mosquitoes. So you can have a group of 50 or 60 people standing around, huge number of mosquitoes, and all we have to do is to make sure to keep the mosquitoes off of you is bring bananas and just put the bananas out. Whoever wants bananas, they can have the bananas. And I found that they do that at Wat Suwannbok. They put bananas out so that it keeps the mosquitoes off the monks.

**Speaker B:** That's great. That's funny, isn't it?

**Speaker A:** Okay, go ahead.

**Speaker B:** I didn't know mosquitoes had a taste for bananas, but I guess they do.

**Speaker A:** No, it's not bananas itself, it's potassium. That in fact, bananas have quite a lot of potassium. They have so much potassium that somebody on YouTube has actually gone through the formula of taking 50 pounds of bananas and refining it down to just the potassium that's left. And he did that with very simple tools. First thing it is, is that you cut the bananas in very thin slices to get all the water out of them, get it down to banana chips, and then you can burn the chips. And once you burn the chips, the ash that's left has got a lot of potassium in it.

**Speaker B:** Is that what you look up on YouTube after a long day of Skype calls?

**Speaker A:** No, I find Dhamma in all kinds of places.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, cool.

**Speaker A:** Yeah, I can find joy wherever it may be found. That's an actual quote of the Buddha. By the way, do you know the word potassium comes from the word potash? Potassium, ash. Okay, potash is actually the ash of fires. The potassium in there, as well as other things, is what they make. You put oil and ash together and you've you know, soap or things that can scrub away. The reason for it is because of the potassium that's in the ash. That's why they call it potassium. The name potassium comes from the word potash. In the old days, they just called it potash. There's so much potassium in ash that that's where the name comes from. But bananas, they're really super heavy duty in potassium. I think that all the potassium on this island is hanging by the tree. So back to the issue of mosquitoes, then. That's one of the ways of controlling them. Another way of controlling them from this smoke. That in fact, here in Thailand, they take cow dung and press it and color it. And sometimes, let's see, yeah, here's one. This is almost 100% the product is cow dung. And this is a mosquito coil. You pop it open. Like this because of the manufacturer. Okay, so now you have two coils and you burn one, and they last about 8 hours. This is Thailand's modern joss stick, or what in the West is often called an incense stick. This is the root of incense sticks. It's kind of funny to recognize that, uh, all of this religious incense stuff— I mean, you see the Catholic Church waving these things in their big ceremonies, all that incense and all of that— they're just trying to keep the mosquitoes out. That's the whole point of incense. You might as well make it smell good. But the important point of incense, these incense sticks I used to have 2 in the back and 2 in the front on those all-night settings so that we could sit and be completely smoky, so that to keep the mosquitoes out. Guess what? Bananas, potassium, mosquito coils, and all kinds of other things are not 100% effective. They're not. That in fact, I generally don't even turn or light a coil until mosquitoes are out. And the only way to know the mosquitoes are out is because they give you a kiss. And when you're kissed by a mosquito, you know that it's time to light a mosquito coil, because his buddies are going to come, and you might get kissed all over. But don't scratch. That's the whole point of watch what your hands are doing. Do what you do with your wisdom part of the mind rather than the reactionary part of the mind that we normally scratch because of the reaction of it's painful and I don't like it. The wisdom is to get the ointment and put some ointment on it and nourish that place. There's also issues about how to handle mosquitoes while they're actually biting. This is actually more information that if you were actually here in Thailand, this would be quite relevant, but it's probably not so relevant where you are because you guys don't have so many mosquitoes. Well, I don't know, Washington State's forests and islands, they've probably got a few.

**Speaker B:** But we have some. It's not too bad though.

**Speaker A:** All right, if you find a mosquito actually biting, the way to handle it, if there's a bite, let us say right here, then the way to handle it is to have your hand and move it back and forth, causing airflow. The mosquitoes will pack their bags and leave. They don't like wind. That's also one of the reasons why Pat Loom or electrical fans are common in Thailand is not because of the coolness, but because the mosquitoes, they don't operate in the area of an electric fan. If you've got the fan blowing where that wind is blowing, it's going to be a mosquito-free zone. Even an oscillating fan, in fact, an oscillating fan will clean the whole area because the mosquitoes are not going to come in where it was oscillating because it'll come back very quickly anyway in the oscillations of the fan. So an oscillating fan will keep a lot of mosquitoes out of the room in Thailand. Also, they normally come through the door, so having a mosquito coil close to the door is going to keep the whole room free from mosquitoes. This is a way of dealing with it. But if you've got a mosquito actually biting you, Don't kill it. Don't slap it. Why? Because if you kill it, you're actually not just killing it, but you're pushing whatever it has as part of its body, its nose or its tendons or whatever is actually in the skin. It's buried in there. If you wave your hand, it will withdraw whatever it's doing and flying away. It will actually pack its bag if you kill it. Its baggage is under your skin. Killed mosquito bites, or the mosquitoes that you kill while they're biting you, are going to be the most ferocious. So if you've got a mosquito bite on your cheek and you're not watching what you're doing and you just slap like that, you kill that mosquito, you're more than likely going to have a big welt from that mosquito bite on your cheek. The reason that I mentioned that is because that's the superstition of the mummy. The Mummy's Curse. I forgot the name who did it, but it was back in the 1920s. They opened King Tut's tomb, and the guy who opened King Tut's tomb, the number one archaeologist, was dead within 3 months. Why? Well, he actually died of a mosquito bite, but the mosquito bite was actually, um, uh, infected. It was infected by the stuff that was in the grave, you know, that whatever in tombs, uh, some pretty heavy-duty bacteria are laying there dormant.

**Speaker C:** And he.

**Speaker A:** Got some of that dust on him. And then when the mosquito bit, he's scratching it, he gets it infected, and he dies from the infection of that mosquito bite. That's the curse of the mummy, is mosquitoes. Don't scratch, don't hit a mosquito, don't kill it. Wave it away, say goodbye, and it'll pack up and leave. But if you kill it, you're going to have a big wound to deal with. And especially if you've got big fingernails that have got mummy dirt on them, or like scratching the dog and having ticks and all kinds of stuff under your fingernails. Those are not ideal situations to be scratching an itch. Because you're putting— not only are you disturbing the skin, but you're putting all kinds of bacteria in there that wouldn't have been otherwise if you hadn't been scratching. So that's a major, major thing, and it was actually quite a hard lesson for me to learn in living in Asia, was learning not to scratch, to deal with the bite as a bite rather than having to deal with it after I've scratched it, because you can only make it worse. In fact, I know of cases where people have left Thailand and left India because of the mosquitoes. But the Thai people don't leave because of the mosquitoes. If they learn to deal with them, then Westerners can learn to deal with them, too, learn to deal with them happily. But a lot of people don't like the tropics because of the mosquitoes. Anagami, they're here all year. They come out twice a day.

**Speaker B:** So about the body postures, so what are your thoughts on yoga? Like, you know, like they're like in the whole yogic teachings, there's a lot of language about how, you know, downward facing dog will affect you one way and warrior one will affect you another way. And then there's the Kundalini stuff about how those postures affect you, like Do you think that's all magical thinking, or do you think there's a lot of science? Do you think there's science there? What do you think about that?

**Speaker A:** Some of it is magical thinking. Quite a lot of it is magical thinking. There is also science in there that in fact the Pranayama breathing was already being done in the time of the Buddha, that the Brahmins knew and the yogis knew, and in fact he had already probably even practiced breathing as an art. Also, the body postures that you see associated with yoga, I have heard the story that those things got originated by monks who were living in caves, so that they could actually do these postures and get some exercise without having to leave the cave. Or you could think of it as being in seclusion, and you can get some exercise, stretching the body and whatnot. Then in fact, you could say that yoga is nothing but step 3 of Anapanasati, getting to know the body. To exercise it, put it in various postures and poses and whatnot, like to find out where your tensions are. And things like this. So, yoga and the teachings of the Buddha are kind of interrelated. But you could also say that some of that, they've taken too far. It's almost like the difference between doing a two-step or a walk. Versus doing full-blown ballet. Okay, yoga is like ballet, they just take it to the extreme. How far can you push the body when in fact all we really want to do is just to dance? But even to learn to dance, you've got to learn how to control the body. You just don't have to do it to the point that you're standing on your tiptoes. Or doing some of these crazy postures that the contestants of yoga try to show off in. So you can take anything to an extreme. Yoga is an extreme form of step 3 of Anapanasati, just getting to know the body. But like I said, Sometimes they do it, they go right to the extreme with it. I've seen videos of yogis doing pranayama breathing to the extreme, so that on his out-breath, it looks like he can suck the exterior front part of his belly right up into his chest. You've seen guys do that, it's like they've got no stomach left, it goes up into them. Good control, very good control of his diaphragm muscles. I just don't particularly need that much control of my diaphragm muscles. I've got no reason to show that off.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, do you know about Kundalini yoga?

**Speaker A:** Kundalini, you could say, is a magicalized version of what is normally a part of the practice, and that is that you can in fact feel sensations, chills in the body. The Kundalini is rising, and I can actually, by talking about it and thinking about it, can create those sensations right now. Just— oh, there it goes. Okay, so, oh gosh, it's not stopping. Okay, anyway, um, that is part of the joy. It's very joyful. It is just— oh God! And I find it really curious and amazing when I see on YouTube and Reddit and whatnot, people saying about— in fact, there was recently something on Reddit, I didn't even get into it, but it was about the pain of Kundalini. How do you handle the pain of Kundalini? Kundalini is not painful.

**Speaker B:** Folks.

**Speaker A:** They're doing something else. No, Kundalini is not painful. They think of it— I think that possibly part of the reason that that's been propagated in the West is because it's thought of as an uncoiling of a snake, because it tends to feel like it is coming out of the butt area or even down into the legs. But by the time this that gets up to the chest is just all over the place, okay? It's just good vibrations. That's what Kundalini is. It's just vibrations, but they're delicious. They can— they feel really, really good. And it's part of the practice of the, um, uh, the Piti. That Piti does have a bodily component. You see that bodily component at every football game when the guy makes a touchdown. His body is just full of Piti. He's just all over the place. You can call that Kundalini if you like. He's dancing and he's cheering and he's throwing that ball and spiking it and all kinds of stuff. You know why? Because he is just fully energized with his, uh, his wind. And that's what the ancients are referring to as the Kundalini. It arises and, and it does, and it just kind of takes over. You almost lose control of the body because it feels so good.

**Speaker B:** Did you ever play football?

**Speaker A:** Pardon?

**Speaker B:** Did you ever play football? I could see you have been a football player in high school. I could imagine it.

**Speaker A:** No. Okay. I played football one day in 7th grade. Yeah, because I remember that particular time because the coach congratulated me for finally getting off my ass and doing something. But normally I had to go to all of the football games. In fact, it was almost kind of a competition between the members of the band and the members of the football team. I think that in fact the football team looked down on the band people, because all we could do was stomp around at halftime. They're the ones who played the game. So there was a lot of jealousy. I mean, even the girls in the band dated the football players, and we really hated that. So much for football. Way too many games.

**Speaker B:** Why do you think that society tends to really appreciate combat sports and violent sports, you know, like football or gladiators or wrestling or, you know, these sorts of activities?

**Speaker A:** I think it's because they're looking for that feeling of win. They're looking for that feeling of success, and they do not know how to get it by generating it directly in the mind. And there is nothing in a society that supports it. It's OK for the kids just to sit around and feel good and enjoy themselves. If you catch a kid enjoying himself, like playing a video game, the first thing you want him to do is, "Stop that, play, go do your homework!" You cannot have fun in this society, you've got work to do. This is the whole mentality. And so now we have these extra sort of Anagami, Anapanasati, Arahant, Arhat, activities that then are supposed to be done to gain gratification. So you wind up with sports being one of them. Another one would be purchasing products. You've probably heard the expression "shop till you drop," right? That many, many people get their benefit, their value Other people will do it by eating food, binge eating when you're having a pity party. All right, so people will do these kind of things. They'll overeat at the wrong time, or they'll go shopping and buy things that they don't need, and then they suffer through having to continue to work to pay for the stuff that they bought that they didn't need. And we buy a lot of stuff that we don't need because of the thrill of, "Wow, I'm really better off now that I own this thing." "Wow, look at me, I'm a big person because I've got a whoop-de-doo," or whatever it is that you bought. And so we look for gratification in these things, and we find gratification, but the gratification is always very limited. That spiking of the ball doesn't last. That very quickly the whistle is going to be blown. They got to be back into that line and ready to fight again. But they can't go home and say, I made a touchdown today, isn't that lovely? Now I don't have to play football for a while. No, they're right back on that line of scrimmage. Let's go get another touchdown so we can feel good again. Let's go get another touchdown so we can feel good again. Let's go buy another car so we can feel good again. And so, um, if by getting our gratification out of the way that is approved by society, we go along to get along, that society does not approve of you feeling good just because you know how to. No, you've got to go do something and have some sort of business deal with the society so that you can only feel good after you've done something to benefit society, like buy one of their cars, or say one of their prayers, or vote for one of their politicians. Whatever it is that they're telling you to do, you got to go do it, and you can't feel good until after you do what you're told to do. Guess what? Even after you do what you're told to do, you probably don't get to feel good for long, if at all.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, this reminds me of your conversation with Anna, or Anna, the other day. I saw the video, it was a great video about how she said she felt like she was cheating by not trying to help, you know, her family, which kind of reminded me of— it's like if you don't get your gratification from society, there's a sense created that you're cheating society. Society doesn't like that. Like, your peers or family will say, oh, you think you can just be happy by sitting? As though you're cheating in the game that they're playing.

**Speaker A:** Here's a question: when did you first realize that? Did you realize that in the past 5 years, or have you known that for many, many years.

**Speaker B:** I would say many, many years, but.

**Speaker A:** I would say so. I would say that we generally learn that as children when we're too, let us say, ignorant as children. That's why the Buddha talks about that Samskara is built in ignorance. We make decisions as a child that we continue on with. And we make that decision when you're a child. And just like you're talking about Anna, she probably made that decision when she was a little girl, maybe 4 or 5, 6 years old. You got to do what you're told to do in order to get along with our society. There now, when she's hearing for the first time in her life, hey man, you don't have to do what society tells you to do, she goes, because she's been told her whole life, you got to do what you're told to do. And in fact, we don't have to do what we're told to do. We just got in the habit of doing it that way because our parents would have punished us if we didn't do what we were told to do. And so now we have all of the laws, police, all kinds of things to keep the social order, because even the criminals are trying to get their joy the same way that all of the, let us say, the non-criminals are trying to get their joy, too. Except that the criminals are trying to do it in a shortcut. In other words, they think that they're going to only get joy by having a touchdown, therefore let's cheat on the touchdown, have the touchdown and the good feelings associated with the touchdown, rather than saying, hey, I don't have to have a touchdown, and I don't have to cheat on a touchdown in order to feel good about having a touchdown. I can just feel good. Nobody knows that, not the criminals and not the good folks. So they're all out there trying to make touchdowns to feel good because of ignorance, because they've all made the same basic mistake that you cannot feel joy on your own. And yet deep down inside, we all know that we can, because when we all, each one of us, little kids— and some of us don't have to remember so far back, I mean, I got to go back about 65 years, you guys don't have to go back so far, so you've got probably better ways of understanding— that when you were really little kids, you actually enjoyed your life because nothing was expected of you.

**Speaker B:** Those are the days.

**Speaker A:** Well, they are, though. This is our day. This is it.

**Speaker B:** Absolutely.

**Speaker A:** Uh, there's an old song out of the '50s, uh, um, uh, being like a kid again, doing what we did again. That's basically What we're looking— okay, Edward, uh, yeah, he's, uh, trying to join and he still can't join the Sangha. Can somebody get over and tell Edward that we're— we had to do a Plan B?

**Speaker B:** I'll add him right now.

**Speaker A:** Oh, hello Edward, good to see you. We've been going out for about 2 hours and this is Plan B. We're going to do it on the Sangha, but for some reason Skype wouldn't let anybody join the call. Okay, okay. No one. I mean, all of us, uh, uh, first off, there was no join button, but second off and worse, that there was no, um, video, uh, button to push to start it. So I don't know how to use Skype for a scheduled call.

**Speaker C:** I'm just happy that you guys set this up.

**Speaker A:** Okay. Edward, this is Kishon and Eric and Parker and Robert.

**Speaker C:** Nice to meet you. Talks with Dhammarato individually many times, so I feel like I know you guys pretty well.

**Speaker A:** I think I listened to yours too.

**Speaker C:** Did you listen to mine?

**Speaker A:** Yeah. I did.

**Speaker C:** I didn't, you know, it's very hard for me to talk. I had my little son all the time here, you know. I've been home with him for 1.5 years now. He's starting school on Monday, you know. I have been a stay-at-home dad, you know, for 1.5 years. Like, it's been a ride.

**Speaker A:** Um, let me see. Sounds like you have a lot more time on your hands to practice.

**Speaker C:** No, no, it's been crazy, you know. It's been like 'Oh, maybe I have half an hour meditating, now he's sleeping, finally.' 'And now I'm on the toilet, I can have some meditation.' At 2:30 and then, 'Ahh!' After 50 minutes, it's been the most crazy experience this. I thought I would have more time, I thought I would, it would be like being free, you know, to be home with the children. Oh my God, I was wrong.

**Speaker A:** Actually sitting on the toilet is an excellent time to practice letting go.

**Speaker C:** Actually, I read it by a Zen monk, Thich Nhat Hanh. He said that you should— he gave a whole instruction how to mindfully go to the toilet. So I think it has its points.

**Speaker A:** I just sent a link. From— this is it, The New Yorker. I think so.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, yeah, I just opened it.

**Speaker A:** When I saw this, I immediately sent it to Willie because about 2 years ago, in the early stages of COVID back in February of 2020, when COVID had just started, I had predicted this, that people will stay away from work long enough to have their own Walden, referencing Henry David Thoreau, which they do in this article. That's what's happening all over the place, that when people are getting away from work and surviving, You've been out of work for a year and a half and you're still alive.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, barely, barely.

**Speaker A:** 3 years ago you would have thought, if I was out of work for 3, for a year and a half, I'd be dead. I would have starved to death because that's what our society teaches us. And here you are, a living example of you didn't die because you weren't having a job.

**Speaker C:** Now I, I still actually, I, I took some night work and some weekend work when my spouse phone. So yeah, just to get out of the house.

**Speaker A:** And well, this article from The New Yorker is talking about the fact that a lot of people are waking up to that. A lot of people are quitting their jobs. A lot of people are looking for a more relaxed way of living. Yeah, I think that that's really great. I think that overall, COVID will have a very positive influence on humanity.

**Speaker C:** I hope, but you know, people still think I'm going now, I'm going back to my old job full-time as a teacher, and I'm going back at 75%, you know, because I'm going to leave the children at daycare and I'm going to pick it up. I'm still going to be the most, you know, the mommy, or what you say. I'm still going to be the one who takes care of most of the daily activities. So I won't work full-time. But really, I would not have gone back to full-time even if I had a choice. 75% is more than enough now. After this year, so much stuff has happened to me as a person, as a parent, everything. And I really practiced what you told me, Dhammarato, with the children. You know, our family life has totally changed, totally. Our children has changed. I mean, it's amazing. Like, it's such a big transformation. Like, I can't even describe it.

**Speaker A:** Go into detail with that, because I don't think anybody knows what you're talking about. What has changed with the kids?

**Speaker C:** Yeah, before we had, like, when I— my daughter is 4 years old and my son is 1 year and 3 months. And when he was born, my daughter was not very happy because she had all the attention, everything. And she, you know, it became— and we were not ready for having two children, you know. We thought it would not be such a big difference from having one child, but this was like opening a whole new world, you know, because now you don't have any time left. For yourself. So I was a very long time, I was very— and my spouse too was very, you know, a little bit depressed by this. And we were like, she was a little bit depressed, I was a little bit depressed, but I tried not to show it. And, you know, I just built up so many negative emotions. And then was COVID, you know, a lot of fear you build up. And then we talked, Dhammarato, and like I realized that I was very angry at my children all the time. I, you know, I was— but then you made me realize something that was very important, that I was angry at my children because I like to be angry. I like to have control, you know. And when I realized that, that there's this thing I was like trying to avoid, I really liked it, you know. Then I realized, okay, I have to change and my whole way of thinking to get rid of this. I have to use Anapanasati every day, gladdening my mind and everything. So I've been doing that, you know, we have not been talking for a very long time, but I have been practicing very much. I had my ups and downs, I had like periods when I don't practice and then I just fall down, back down, and see that okay, practice still works. Because when I don't do I go back to being the ignorant asshole I normally am.

**Speaker A:** Welcome to society.

**Speaker C:** But it's totally changed. I started to get angry less and less. And then my spouse started getting more— I was very I was very passive-aggressive all the time because I was not really dealing with the situation good with the two children. And so I was getting angry less and less, and it created more trust between me and my spouse because she didn't like my anger, you know. She got very insecure because I was very passive-aggressive. I was like, oh darling, have you put the shoes here? Thank you. You know, very you know, like, yeah, not acting nice, you know. So, and also the children. So I started just not being so angry myself, and then I just developed it as it came, like now almost never getting angry. And also like I started to radiate more joy, you know, it just came naturally with replacing my angry thoughts with thoughts of other thoughts. So I've been working with that a lot, replacing. It's okay, I think like this, is this true what I'm thinking? No, this is just anger talking. Okay, what can I think instead? Okay, I can think, oh, it's very nice that she's creative, that she pulled all the toys out on the floor, but I just cleaned it up. It's very nice, she's trying to be creative. I'm thinking like that and I change it in small changes in my thinking, in my mood. Over time has made a big difference for me as a person. And then I think the other guys.

**Speaker A:** On this group here will agree with you that that's exactly how it works, that these small changes that we keep making repeatedly over and over and over again in this moment begin to change the way that we see our lives.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, just compound. And then actually, now we had a lot of, for our daughter, when he was born, our son, we had a lot of screen time for her, because she was very addicted to screens, you know. And then also it was more easy for us to get some time to do other stuff, clean, you know. But you know, I changed my priorities now. Now we're like, we clean, we take care of the children's needs first. We play with them first, we do everything first. Then we maybe clean, do the dishes, do stuff like that afterwards when they're sleeping, or when it's a good time when we see that they are doing stuff themselves. So now we're going from a household that like was many typical modern households. Now we just put away the children with the phones, you know, we give them the iPad and like, okay, you sit there. And we always tell the children, you know, because I worked as a teacher for 15 years with children, and actually we're telling the children to get out of the way all the time. So now in our whole household, now we changed that. Now the children are like the number one priority, and then everything else comes. And we didn't— I didn't even realize I was selfish enough. But as you said, Dhammarato, selfishness, it never feels good, you know. But to be this unselfish for 1.5 years, you know, to be like like, okay, I'm now, I finally have my toilet break at 2:30 in the night. I'm gonna just gonna sit here, relax, and then you hear the screaming, and you know, okay, I don't even get 5 minutes in the toilet because my Anagami sits in my lap all the time. You know, that's right, to be able to work with that, like you said, it's just a toy to work with, and it's been such an amazing experience. I can't even, you know, it totally changed our dynamics. Where my daughter is not so angry anymore. She is more independent. She doesn't even, you know, we play a lot every day, I play. Like many people when they come home to us, they will say to us, your house, you're living an unsustainable lifestyle, because you play so much with your children, you do so much with your children.

**Speaker A:** I'm really glad that you're telling me all of this. I was just about to ask you about your The daughter is 4 years old, right? Yeah.

**Speaker C:** Yeah. 4 and a half.

**Speaker A:** Okay. All right. Here's what happens typically is, is that when a child that age is the elder child and mommy has a new child, a new baby, the new baby now winds up getting all of the nurturing and the caring that the first child got. While the new— the old child, the 4-year-old, gets a new label, gets a new name, and that is Mama's little helper. Yeah, yeah. Okay, so that means that the 4-year-old in many, many households, unless they're being careful about it, put the 4-year-old to work, making them a mini adult. And that, that completely destroys that child's previous life. Before, they were the child, they were the nurtured one, they were the one who was taken care of. But now the new baby is on the scene. Now the little girl, 4-year-old, becomes Mama's little helper, and she will resent that the rest of her life. But luckily, you've made an intervention. Congratulations, you have actually changed that little girl's life by making a change.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, we were going down that road, and actually we were going down a lot of roads We were going down the road of stop nurturing, you know, you're gonna grow up. Maybe I have some red hair, you know, my daughter was doing makeup on me yesterday. I'm sorry if you— painted my whole face. I'm gonna make you very pretty, Daddy, you know. All right. Going down that road, you know, and I can see now that we stopped in exactly the right time, because Still some damage has been done by not nurturing, but I think we changed a lot. We changed the way we see each other here, and also like the tone, like when we talk to each other. Like she's like now, she's just like, she's because I'm talking nice to her, she's talking nice to me. You know, she's always like, oh, thank you, Dad. Oh, can, and like And she's very, you know, she shows me, she shows appreciation because I am showing appreciation. I'm not acting, I'm not acting rude to her and demanding her to be nice. And I see that a lot with the parents I work with and the children I work with in school, that the parents, they have put like this moral standard on the children, but themselves are here. It's like, why can't you do anything by yourself? They're like with the phones. Why can't you do anything by yourself? Go do anything, but you're not doing anything by yourself, you're sitting with your phone all the time. So I also try with that, put away the phone, you sit and breathe, when which is with the children, have boring time, you know, sit on the floor, have it boring together, you know, get weird together, you know, the sound, points, he pokes, picks my nose, I'm like, what are you doing? And we just laugh, you know, because we're so bored. It's very important to be bored, you know. And that's also what this teaching has taught me. And then I done the 10-minute meditations throughout the day, you know, as I saw that you gave an instruction on how to meditate video. That was very good, because that gave me a specific time, because before I was like, I'm gonna, how I'm gonna do? Now I was like, Okay, I do it in the morning, I do it in the night when I turn around, when I lay on my side now sleeping, and then I turn, and then I do it in the morning 10 minutes, and I do it 5 minutes, you know, and it all, and it took away the pressure of it. I having to be like, and I have to sit 1 hour. Destroyed the whole like routine thing, and now I'm starting to get to the point where when I'm out walking, now I have a dog also, we adopted a dog. I know we're crazy, but we adopted a dog. Yes, so yes, so come, come.

**Speaker A:** Yeah, I see him. Oh, he's a big guy.

**Speaker C:** He's a big guy. He was very scared of people, you know, but we changed all that. Now he's a very happy guy. All right, so when we're out Now I take just, take, just jump in the water, I take a swim, and then I sit and meditate, and I don't know how long I sit, I don't care, you know. I'm just sitting in the sun, I'm meditating, he's standing, and then we're just having a good time.

**Speaker B:** You know.

**Speaker C:** You know, many things, still have some issues, you know, and I want to clean up more of myself, you know. Because that's really what you're doing. You know, you're cleaning.

**Speaker A:** Exactly. Edward, thank you so much for sharing this. This has been brilliant. I really enjoy this. I really get a kick out of it when I hear people's success stories and being able to make some changes in their life. But I'm especially pleased about your daughter because you literally have been able to change her life. In a way that she will never know, because most of the children at the age of 4, when a new baby is born, that's the point in time when they lose their nurturing and start being Mama's little helper, and they never get out of that. But on the other side of it is, is that now that you've got kids to play with, you're actually beginning to play and have joy in your life in in a way that you wouldn't have otherwise. To just actually being playful.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, and actually it took some months, but actually I got rid of like, oh, I just want to sit with my phone, oh, I just want to do this. I got rid of that feeling after a while of just training to be present, to sit with them, you know, like I said. And now my spouse is starting to do the same also. So we're sitting on the floor together and I was like, I said to my spouse yesterday, I was like, I'm so happy that, thank you so much. That you do this. Because I had one little irritation left before, and that was like that my spouse is, she's doing it, but she's not doing as much as I'm doing it. So it was like, it started a little irritation, but when she started to do it as well, like the whole day, the whole morning, the whole day, you know, even to the sleep, I was like, it was very, I was very happy because I could see that she really listened and she really like, she really embraced this style of living. And like Metta, very happy now, because usually she used to get like 10 minutes, 30 minutes attention every day. Now she has, when we're home, she has 8 hours. It's a big difference, you know, it's a big difference in her, I think, because before she was put on the front of the screen. And I'm sorry, I'm ashamed to say that, but we did it because we didn't have any energy. We didn't know, I didn't know that you could have so much patience, you know, I didn't know that you could practice patience, practice being bored, you know, this intensively. And you could change, you know, your way of seeing. So now we have more fun, you know, it's starting more spontaneous playing and play and creativity. Comes from being bored, you know. Now she sits and she creates, you know, she sits and creates, paints, she does stuff, she sings, we sing together, we do stuff, we're really, you know, silly people here at home. And she really softened me up because I'm, you know, I'm an angry guy normally, I'm a martial arts guy, you know, and I am like, I have lifted weights, I have done everything, this is my Jujutsu practice, I'm doing. And like, I have an easy time to get into aggression. Like, that's just not— that's easy for me, you know.

**Speaker A:** Our society supports that. That, in fact, Robert had just asked the question, and Edward, you have just now answered it. The question is, why is the world generally addicted to sports? Or to violence. You have just said the reason for it was because that was the way you were raised, and that you're now raising your daughter in a completely different way that is more playful and less competitive.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, competitive is a very good choice because you talked about being, you know, being friends with not just with people but being friends with situations, being friends with your own emotions, but also being like a brother. I try to think like, okay, I want to be a brother to everyone, you know. And when I think like unbrotherly thoughts, I'm like, okay, wait a minute. Okay, this is a nice girl walking by. Okay, she's very sexy, but now I'm like, no, wait, she's— I hope she has a great day. I hope that she, you know, when she meets someone today, that maybe she has missed a lot, or she established a relationship again with someone good. And then I'm like, oh my God, now I feel good because I think good thoughts about her. And like other persons too, when I see this, when I see like a neighbor who is screaming, you know, and I'm like, I just want to go up and punch his face, you know. And I'm like, no, I hope he has, I hope this happens to him. I'm actually imagining him getting not something he wants or something. And then I'm like, oh, so I have changed it, but still, you know, I still get irritated. But also a big, actually a big point was at work now, I got a shelf on my head and it just fell down from, I was opening a shelf and the whole shelf fell.

**Speaker B:** Down on my head.

**Speaker C:** And I was like, ah, one second. And then I was like, oh, how.

**Speaker A:** We solve this problem?

**Speaker C:** Are we gonna get this shelf up? It's more and more of these moments are coming, more and more of these moments of like I get some kind of pain, something happens, I get scared, you know, it can be anything. And I'm just reacting like a millisecond, then it's over. It's like it never happened.

**Speaker A:** Sati. Just in time, right? Yeah, that's— you got this, got you when you need it the most. That's exactly right. So congratulations on that too. That's amazing. Yeah, but I still need to wake up when we need to wake up. Yeah, like when a shell falls on us.

**Speaker C:** You know, I got, I got the chance for my head, and, and the old lady was like, oh, what happened? You know, Because I was at the house working as a nurse, you know, just coming home to her. She has dementia. And I got this shell from my head and I was like, no, it's okay. We just put it up. You know, I just got it on my head like one second and I was like, no, it's okay. We'll fix this. There's no problem. I didn't even acknowledge the problem. I was like, oh, that's curious. Okay. And then I just put it up again. I fixed it. So it was like no problem.

**Speaker A:** No problem. Exactly.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, but I have to say, when you're like in this mode, because it's been a very special circumstance for me. Kishon, I just want to tell you, yes, I had a lot of time to practice, but not in the way you think. That's what I mean. So that you have a point, because I've been home, I've been secluded in some ways, and I had to meet myself. I had to face myself like this. So in that point, Kishon, it's very true. Being home for one and a half years, even with children, is meeting yourself also. It's being in some kind of seclusion also.

**Speaker A:** So you said that the kids are going to school soon, so I would imagine kids are off. Yeah, when the boss is away, the mice play, right? Wherever that goes.

**Speaker C:** Now I'm starting working again, actually. So, but I'm gonna try. This is gonna be very hard. This is gonna be the big challenge, coming back to work, to all the people there with all their problems, their energy, and all the, like, ordinary stuff, like the jealousy, the— Lots of opportunities to practice. Yeah, yeah, it's gonna be very, you know, very interesting. So I'm— and I'm— that's actually what I'm— Dhammarato, what should I think about now when I go back to work? I just want to— I think I have the answer inside of me, but I just want to know what you think about when you— when you have been long gone for a long time, I come back And now I would.

**Speaker A:** Go so far as to go right to the very end of it and say that in those moments when— because things are going to happen— if you have Sati in that moment, then the kind of thoughts that you would want to have is, never mind, I can handle this, this is no problem. I mean, just like you had started, so you're actually going in the right direction. You don't need me to say anything, you already know the answer to this. And not only that, but you've been demonstrating that you do have some Sati, that when shells fall and when the sting, uh, when the snake bites, when the dog barks, all of that, you know, I can think of my favorite things. That song coming out of The Sound of Music is what we're talking about here, is that you can say, I can handle that. So when something happens at the office we can say, never mind, I can take care of that.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, yeah. And it's actually, you know, it's also like, I want to, but I want to do more for other people now. I recently signed up to walk the nights here in my neighborhood to check up on the teenagers here, you know. Like when I was a teenager, I was running around, there was like all these old people walking around in jackets, you know, talking to young people. Now I'm gonna be one of them. So, you know, because I think it's important now.

**Speaker A:** Hang on a second. Kitty, come see my friends. Come see my friends. Here's Kitty. Hi Kitty. Hi Kitty. Hello. Thank you. She's 9 now.

**Speaker B:** It's an honor to finally meet her after all the—.

**Speaker A:** Yeah, yeah. So as far as kids go, I've got an experimental model, and I'm glad that you have some experimental models also.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, I'm really starting to think like for myself with stuff, you know. I'm like, okay, I don't like this. Why I don't like this? Is it I don't like this because society told me, or I really don't like it? I started to really investigate that stuff, and that's important because then you're starting to really grow up, actually. And also I got like.

**Speaker A:** You know.

**Speaker C:** The ability to be, you know, to show your children that it's okay to not do anything. It's okay to just sit there, be so frustrated with boredom that eventually we all start doing stuff. Like the 4-year-old, we're starting to, you know, we've got some sisters to do stuff. The 1-year-old, he's starting to, we read all the books, you know, many times. My 1-year-old is sitting with books like this, looking like a little old man, you know, reading his paper. And then the energy in the house is totally transformed. And actually, I have to tell, I have to give the children credit too, because they're actually naturally in this state.

**Speaker A:** So yes, that's it, you got it. We were naturally joyful when we were 2 years old. Something happened.

**Speaker C:** It's all the critique all the time, you know, and it's also in it, and it's always almost because we as grown-ups, we want to have like our own time and we want to like, I'm gonna be a parent, I'm gonna be the best parent, but to be the best parent, then I have to have my own time. And I was like, but that's the wrong way of thinking. After a while, I started notice like my time, this is just a few years, you know, this is now I'm thinking like I can sustain this like I can sustain this very long time. Actually, I can sustain this the whole life, but I can sustain like this intensity at least until they're 10, 12. You know, I can do it.

**Speaker A:** I maybe— I know you can. And that's the attitude that the Buddha talks about. That's the first step on the actual path of the Buddha is that attitude. I know I can do it now. Yeah, and congratulations, that's marvelous.

**Speaker C:** I don't doubt the practice anymore. Sometimes I get into doubting myself, and sometimes, like, I was like, I cleaned out my anger, you know, because my spouse says, but she says like, it's a whole different energy around me too when I'm speaking. I don't have the underlying aggression all the time, you know. It's still Sometimes it's there, but it's very much less. And when it comes, when I get angry and when I have to tell my son because he's trying to hit the dog with something, or when I have to tell, you know, I can say to him, stop, or we can have a discussion and I can be a little bit stern, but there's no danger there. There's no aggression. Like underneath, I almost have to act, you know. I have to like, now you stop it. Because I have the— before I was like, okay, now I have to control myself so I don't like do something dumb, you know, because so I don't like pull my daughter's shirt or do something. And I'm just being honest with you guys, you know, I have this big problem with anger, and but I changed it. I really changed it.

**Speaker A:** Well, actually, you telling us about this is very, very healthy for you, that you're talking about seeing things the way that they have been and making some changes in that. And this is actually quite profound. This is a very healthy point in time for you. That's one of the reasons— that's the main reason why I wanted you to go on with this, is because this is a very healthy thing for your that you're doing is that you're coming out and sharing this with us, which actually makes it go even deeper for you. Yeah, and I really want to congratulate you. I'm really just overjoyed. All of that Kundalini we were talking about a while ago is coming up. It's greatly joyful. I really appreciate you telling us this. This has been great. Arya, do you have anything to say? Congratulations, really, you did a really great job.

**Speaker C:** Thank you, thank you. I worked really hard, you know. It's a hard, it's a hard sometimes, but we forget also because it feels so easy sometimes. Sometimes I like, why does it feel so hard? Ah yes, I have to have right effort also. Because sometimes we forget when stuff goes right, we forget that we have to put in the effort.

**Speaker A:** Wow, I'm really impressed. We haven't had that many conversations. You've really picked up what I've been talking about.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, you know, and actually I've been watching all of you guys' talks, you know, so I mean, I've been assimilating everything that you guys said.

**Speaker A:** Thank you so much for sharing. This has been really marvelous. Thank you. I, I, I mean, it just proves over and over again that the Dharma works. It's a working method. The Buddha figured something out that is just so marvelous.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, but, but one thing, one thing it's very easy to fall into is then it's not starting the practice, actual practice, is looking at too many Dhammarato videos. Get into that mode too, that like, oh, I'm just gonna, I'm just gonna reinforce this, and then like, then you're listening to it.

**Speaker A:** And it depends upon— I mean, people do get addicted to MSNBC, people do get addicted to CNN, people do get addicted to Fox News, people get addicted to YouTube in general. So it doesn't matter, the addiction is not the issue. The addiction of what becomes the— so if you're addicted to joy, that's a different kind of addiction than being addicted to being angry. Yeah, addicted to listening to wholesome talks by fat old monks or whatever is a whole lot more wholesome than listening to topics about how terrible the world is, which you find a lot on with YouTube, especially if it's politics. Congratulations on your addiction. What did he say? Eric, say again. I said congratulations on your addiction to the wholesome. Yeah.

**Speaker C:** That'S totally different.

**Speaker A:** Yeah, we can call it— instead of calling it an addiction, because the word addiction is kind of problematic addicted, but we can use the word enthusiasm or eagerness because that's what we're really looking for. We're not looking for people who are serious about the Dharma. We're looking for people who are enthusiastic about it. And you can call it being addicted if you want, but we can look at— use even more wholesome language than that and just call it really enthusiastic. That we're like the Marines. All we need is a few enthusiastic folks. Yeah, I'm with you there too. I've watched probably a very significant percentage of the 900 videos that's on this channel. So yeah, now we know why the view counts are so high. Robert, Robert, what's up?

**Speaker B:** Yeah, what's up, man? Uh, not much. How's it going?

**Speaker C:** How many times you watch the videos?

**Speaker B:** A lot.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, it's great. And I really like it. I, I, I really enjoyed You're talking about the frequencies too. I had a lot of help with that, Robert, when I was going to the countryside with my family, you know, going way out in the wild where there's almost no electricity, nothing. And it really helped. It was like, oh my God, it was like putting away, like some of the harder aspects of practice just destroyed.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, huge difference. Kishon's going through it right now. He's actually— yeah, came out here to Washington to go camping. It's— yeah, it's massive. It's a huge difference.

**Speaker C:** Yeah, Kishan, how is it going?

**Speaker A:** Uh, it's going great. Visited the Wat in Seattle, which is really nice, and tomorrow we should be in the forest. I'm really glad to see you hooked up with Eric. That's the Dharma for you. I'm really glad to see that. This is something that a lot of people don't pick up in the books, but it's very, very deeply embedded in— we use it in the concept of the Triple Gem. The Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha is the Triple Gem. It's not just about Buddha, or it's not just about about the Dhamma, the real point is about the Sangha. And I really didn't understand that until I was actually a monk for a while, to recognize that, hey, these guys are really good friends if I let them be, instead of competition, which I thought they were. I mean, I was the best meditator in town when I walked in to watch the monk. And I let a few people know that, only to find out that that's not the way to do things. You have to be shown.

**Speaker C:** You've been shown, you know, Buddha Dasa, he came, you know, to your hut. You know, you told that he came and he was walking.

**Speaker A:** No, this is Ajahn Poh who would do that. No, Bhikkhu Buddha Dasa, when I knew him, all already had trouble walking. He walked with a cane. Any video that you see, you will probably see him either sitting with a cane in the vicinity or walking with it. Yeah, he— when he would go on walks, there were— there would be monks that would help him to walk around, that he would need help to get into a car and whatnot. So he was kind of an invalid. Anagami for the last 5 years of his life. But that gave everybody an opportunity. Meanwhile, it was Achan Po who was the real, let us say, abbot of Wat Soen Mokkhun, and he was the one who really took care of things. So all of the time that I spent with Bhikkhu Buddhadasa was either at his kuti or within 100 feet of it to where with Ajahn Po, he was all over the place. Then in fact, most of the time, if you go to the office at Wat Soan Mokkhun and say, I'm looking for Ajahn Po, the answer will always be, I don't know where he is. Don't know where Ajahn Po is because he's just out there someplace, just going from kuti to kuti, visiting monks and taking care of business in a very joyful way.

**Speaker C:** Yeah.

**Speaker A:** And so, yeah, Achan Po would come to my kuti. In fact, it was so strange that in fact, you— we talk about psychic abilities and, um, uh, synchronicity and that kind of stuff because there's an element of it that was real. And Achan Po Anagami was there training me in that, and the way that he would train me was by coming to my kuti unannounced and standing out in the yard about 10 feet or so from the kuti and just stand there and wait until I figured out that he was there. And I got pretty good at it. Now it's a skill that's been developed. So an example was last night, the cell phone had run out of juice. It was dead, dead meat. And so I put the battery back on, but I came into the room with the idea of calling Tam. When I turned the cell phone back on, the first thing that I noticed is that she had called me within the last minute. So I knew and was thinking about her while she was trying to call me on my dead cell phone, and I picked that up immediately. Okay. Other things that happen quite often, in fact, I sit here and I look out because I can see the road through the trees and whatnot like that. And always when anybody comes into the yard, I know it. But especially Tam, when she. She could be coming down the street and not even be in sight. And I know she's here. How do I know that? I don't know. But I do know that whatever it was, it had to do with our trying to Anpanasati, and the way that he was training me by not doing anything. He was just standing there waiting for me to figure out that I was there.

**Speaker C:** That's amazing.

**Speaker A:** That is so amazing. And so that's the— that's, uh, there's other things that are like that. They're just— I don't know. I mean, that's part of the way that he trained also, was this, this, this marvelous unsure about what's really going on here, because we haven't quite tapped into it or figured it out yet. But boy, is it joyful to do that investigation. And it happens often, many times on these views that we talk about it from sometimes. And in fact, it just happened yesterday when an example that I was using— I use bird watching only to find out that the two people that I was in contact with, a husband and wife, were avid birdwatchers. I don't talk about birdwatching very often, but sometimes I do. But they picked up on that. Another one was that I was talking about how to do dishwashing, you know, each dish. And the guy that I was telling that, I'm a professional dishwasher. How did you know? Another example that I was talking about sharpening knives to some guy, and he winds up being a quite average knife sharpener. It's just another example was I mentioned a song to someone and she says that record is still on our own turntable. We played that song last night on our turntable. It's still right there. Physical evidence. This is quite marvelous that synchronicity works that way. And I'm bringing all of this up because I think that it was Ajahn Po's training that actually helped me tap into that. How am I going to know that Ajahn Po is in the yard waiting on me? How am I going to know that? But I have that sense. I have a feeling that I better go look out the window to see what's going on. How did I know? I didn't know that Tam had called me. I had no knowledge of that. But the timing was amazing.

**Speaker C:** It's also teaching you how to investigate, you know.

**Speaker A:** Yes, to invest. Yes. In fact, how we know all of this synchronicity is happening is because we're waking up to it. We're investigating it. We're seeing it. We're noticing it, paying attention to it, that that synchronicity is just part of the evidence that we have that everything is in fact kind of unified. That we do that with connections with people, we do that with synchronicity, we do that with— in physics, the basic laws of physics, there's only 4 forces, there's just 4 of them, and the entire universe is built upon these 4 forces of nature. It's unbelievably how simple things really are. And yet how complicated they have become because of just 4 little properties. So things are both very simple and very complex. And through investigation, we begin to see both sides of that. So rather than being lost and confused and full of doubt, we can see how both simple things really are and also how populations.

**Speaker C:** I'm just gonna go.

**Speaker A:** Charge you guys. So, wow, I'm really glad that Edward came onto the conversation because you guys don't even know him. Yeah, his story was great. I loved it.

**Speaker B:** Yeah, it was awesome.

**Speaker A:** Well, I think that we've been doing this for what, nearly 2 hours and 30 minutes or more, so we can kind of wind this call down. Does anybody have any new topics or anything that we want to talk about today? Just as a closing statement, I was going to say that, uh, meeting somebody who's actively practicing the Noble Dhamma is ironically almost magical. It's unusual, but it's possible. It really is possible that we can practice the Dhamma and get good benefit out of it. So I do want to thank you all. This has been a delightful meeting. Thank you, Edward, so much for your coming on. I really appreciate the story that you've given. I mean, everybody, this is so great.

**Speaker C:** Thank you. Thank you all, guys.

**Speaker A:** Tishon, you and I will figure out how to get the Skype Sangha thing going somehow or another. But even though with this one, this has been a really great meeting. So let's plan on doing this every week. Okay, okay. I really like this. This is great. And we'll have more people join, but we'll figure out how to get that group thing going. Yeah, absolutely, no problem. All right, thank you guys so much. Thank you. Thank you.

**Speaker B:** This is really great.

**Speaker A:** To see you all. Cheers. Good night. All right, thank you, Edward, especially. Bye-bye. Hi.


### Summary

This Dhamma talk, led by Dhammarato with Sangha friends, covers several interconnected themes central to practical Buddhist practice. Here is a summary of the key points:

### **Core Themes**

1.  **The "Real" World vs. The "Conceptual" World:**
    *   Dhammarato begins by distinguishing between the immediate, sensory world we actually inhabit (our location, the people we directly interact with) and the vast, abstract "conceptual world" (maps, countries, "all beings") we learn in school.
    *   He argues that much spiritual confusion arises from applying teachings meant for the direct, local world to an abstract, conceptual one. For example, the Buddha's teachings on "the world" (loka) refer to one's immediate sensory and social environment, not a globalized concept.

2.  **Consciousness is Dependently Arisen and Local:**
    *   He references a sutta where the Buddha corrects the monk Sati, explaining that consciousness is not a permanent entity that transmigrates, but something that changes based on conditions.
    *   **A key practical insight:** Your consciousness and mental state change simply by changing your physical and social environment (e.g., moving from New York to a forest). True practice involves waking up to this change in your present "world," not clinging to old mental habits.

3.  **A Practical, Localized Approach to Metta (Loving-Kindness):**
    *   Dhammarato critiques the common, abstract phrasing "may all beings be happy" as an impossible, conceptual ideal that can lead to frustration.
    *   He advocates for a grounded Metta practice based on the "six directions" from the suttas: directing kindness to real people in your life—those ahead (associates), behind (colleagues/antagonists), to your right (friends), left (family), above (authorities), and below (those who provide service).
    *   This makes the practice doable and immediate: make your immediate circle happy, and let that goodness ripple out naturally.

4.  **Deconstructing Pain and Discomfort:**
    *   A significant portion of the talk examines the nature of pain, using examples from aging, meditation (Goenka's "strong determination sitting"), and even mosquito bites.
    *   The core teaching: What we call "pain" is often a **sensation combined with a mental reaction of aversion**. By investigating the sensation mindfully—locating its epicenter, seeing its changing nature—we can separate the raw sensation from the "pain" label and our dislike of it.
    *   The skillful approach is not masochistic endurance but wise management: making the body comfortable, using ointment for itches, and changing posture when needed. The goal is to develop a mind that can meet intense sensations with a attitude of "I can handle this right now," thereby dissolving the compounded, conceptualized "suffering."

5.  **Mindfulness in Daily Life (Anapanasati Step 3):**
    *   Dhammarato emphasizes bringing mindfulness to ordinary activities and body postures as a core practice.
    *   This includes noticing habits like scratching, fidgeting, or adopting aggressive postures (like "arms akimbo"), and consciously choosing more relaxed and aware behaviors. This trains the mind in presence and breaks automatic, often unskillful, reactions.

6.  **Joy as the Path and the Result:**
    *   Throughout the talk, the emphasis is on cultivating joy (piti) and a light heart as the fuel for practice. The attitude should be one of enthusiastic investigation, not grim determination.
    *   Edward's personal story exemplifies this: by working with his anger through mindfulness and consciously cultivating patience and playful presence with his children, he transformed his family's dynamic and found deeper joy. This is presented as the real, working test of the Dhamma.

7.  **Critique of Cultural and Religious Concepts:**
    *   Dhammarato questions the "Bodhisattva ideal" of postponing one's enlightenment until all beings are saved, seeing it as a later, conceptual development that can be burdensome. He contrasts it with the earlier ideal of the Arahant, who cleans up their own mind and naturally radiates joy to their immediate world.
    *   He also touches on how society conditions us to seek gratification through external validation (sports, shopping, achievement) rather than generating inner well-being independently.

### **Conclusion**
The talk is a call to move away from abstract, religious, and often burdensome concepts of Buddhism and return to the Buddha's original, pragmatic psychology. The path is about **waking up to your present, sensory world, understanding how your mind creates suffering from sensations, and cultivating a joyful, mindful presence that transforms your immediate reality.** The practice is validated not by beliefs but by tangible changes in one's life and relationships, as shared in the personal experiences within the talk.

### Metaphors and Stories

Based on a detailed analysis of the talk, here are the key metaphors and stories used by the speakers, primarily **Speaker A (Dhammarato)**, to illustrate their points about Dhamma practice, perception, and society:

### **Core Metaphors & Analogies**

1.  **The Child's Limited World**
    *   **Metaphor:** A child raised in the 1830s Deep South whose world extends only "as far as he can walk barefoot." This is used to illustrate how, for most of human history and in our personal development, our direct, experiential world is very small and local.
    *   **Purpose:** To contrast the "real," sensory world with the modern "conceptualized world" we learn through maps, globes, and media.

2.  **Discovering vs. Making Fire**
    *   **Analogy:** Humans first discovered natural fire (lightning strikes) long before they learned how to *produce* it. This parallels how Buddhism first arrived in the West in a superficial, "ordinary" way before its deeper teachings could be accessed.
    *   **Purpose:** To explain the gradual and often misunderstood transmission of Buddhist teachings.

3.  **Flying Over Idaho**
    *   **Story/Analogy:** Speaker A mentions flying over Idaho but not stopping, arguing that doesn't count as "being there." Your world in the airplane is just the airplane.
    *   **Purpose:** To reinforce the difference between **conceptual knowledge** (knowing of a place) and **direct sensory experience** (being in a place). It underscores that the conceptual world "is not real for us" in the same way.

4.  **The Six Points of the Compass (Localized World)**
    *   **Metaphor:** Reinterpreting the "six directions" (north, south, east, west, up, down) not as vast geographical distances but as one's immediate social sphere:
        *   **Front:** People you do business with.
        *   **Back:** People who might "stab you in the back" (adversaries).
        *   **Right:** Friends.
        *   **Left:** Family.
        *   **Above:** Authority figures (bosses, priests, the wealthy).
        *   **Below:** Service people (waiters, clerks).
    *   **Purpose:** To radically redefine "the world" (*loka*) from an abstract, global concept to a manageable, immediate field of relationships where Metta (loving-kindness) can be practically applied. It makes the practice feel possible.

5.  **The Bodhisattva Ideal as a Pity Party**
    *   **Metaphor:** The Mahayana Bodhisattva vow ("May all beings be enlightened before I am") is compared to someone saying, **"I want everybody to shut up so I can have some peace and quiet."**
    *   **Purpose:** To critique what he sees as an impossible, conceptualized ideal that leads to frustration, contrasting it with the more attainable Arahant ideal of cleaning up one's own mind and spreading joy in one's immediate "world."

6.  **Training the Mind Like Training a Dog (or a Monkey)**
    *   **Analogy:** Just as you train a dog with rewards, you train the mind by rewarding it with joyful recognition when it handles a difficulty. This extends to the story of **monkeys pressing a lever**—they continue pressing even after rewards stop, akin to humans performing learned behaviors (like consumerism) that no longer bring happiness.
    *   **Purpose:** To explain how mental habits are formed and how we can consciously re-train them through wholesome reinforcement.

7.  **Physical Pain as a Concept**
    *   **Metaphor:** Intense physical sensation (like in meditation) is only "pain" because the mind labels it as something it dislikes. By investigating the sensation closely, you break the monolithic concept of "pain" into individual, manageable mind-moments of sensation.
    *   **Story:** The joke about the man who goes to the doctor saying, "It hurts when I stab my arm," and the doctor says, "Stop stabbing your arm." This is applied to unnecessary self-torture in meditation.
    *   **Purpose:** To teach that suffering is subjective and can be deconstructed by changing one's relationship to sensation.

### **Key Stories & Anecdotes**

1.  **Edward's Parenting Transformation (Speaker C)**
    *   **Story:** Edward shares how applying Dhamma (not reacting in anger, being present, prioritizing play) transformed his family life during 1.5 years as a stay-at-home dad. He stopped making his daughter "mama's little helper" when the son was born and instead nurtured her, leading to more joy and less conflict.
    *   **Purpose:** A real-life success story demonstrating the practical application of Dhamma in the most challenging domestic circumstances, showing how changing one's own mind changes one's world.

2.  **Ben's Visit to His Grandmother (Speaker B)**
    *   **Story:** Ben describes using Metta and mindfulness to stay joyful and positive while visiting his grumpy, arthritic grandmother and his stressed mother, improving the atmosphere for them.
    *   **Purpose:** To provide a concrete example of applying the "localized world" Metta practice effectively, creating happiness within one's immediate sphere of influence.

3.  **The Agitated Monk vs. Stephen Batchelor**
    *   **Story:** Speaker A recalls a video debate where a monk (Ajahn Brahmali), passionately defending rebirth, was physically agitated ("arms akimbo"), while Stephen Batchelor, arguing for a secular view, was calm and still.
    *   **Purpose:** To argue that true Dhamma practice should result in bodily calm and lack of agitation, suggesting that dogmatic views often correlate with mental unrest.

4.  **Ajahn Poh's Psychic Training**
    *   **Story:** Speaker A describes how his teacher, Ajahn Poh, would train him by silently standing outside his hut, waiting for him to intuitively sense his presence. He links this to modern examples of synchronicity, like thinking of someone just as they call.
    *   **Purpose:** To illustrate the subtle, intuitive awareness and interconnectedness that deep mindfulness practice can reveal, moving beyond book-learning.

5.  **Extreme Body Modifiers (Fishhooks, Knives)**
    *   **Story:** References to individuals who train to endure extreme body modification (hanging from fishhooks through ribs, inserting many knives through cheeks) as a contrast to Dhamma practice.
    *   **Purpose:** To argue that while mind-over-matter is possible, the Dhamma path is about finding ease and comfort, not seeking out unnecessary pain to prove toughness. It distinguishes between **endurance through aversion** and **peace through wisdom.**

6.  **The Mummy's Curse (King Tut)**
    *   **Story:** The archaeologist who died from an infected mosquito bite after opening King Tut's tomb.
    *   **Purpose:** Used humorously to reinforce the practical lesson: don't slap a mosquito that's biting you, as it injects more irritants. Wave it away gently. It connects a historical mystery to a practical Dhamma lesson in non-violent, wise reaction.

### **Summary of Rhetorical Purpose**
The metaphors and stories consistently serve to:
*   **Demystify Dhamma:** Grounding abstract concepts (world, pain, compassion) in direct, sensory experience.
*   **Critique Conceptualization:** Arguing against dogmatic, idealized, or globalized views that lead to frustration.
*   **Promote Practicality:** Offering tangible, "doable" practices for mindfulness, Metta, and daily life.
*   **Validate the Teachings:** Using personal anecdotes from speakers and students to show the system "works."
*   **Contrast with Society:** Highlighting how societal conditioning (towards consumerism, aggression, conceptual living) differs from the path of mindful, joyful awareness.

### Connect with Dhammarato and Sangha Friends

☸️ **Dhamma Friends Discord** — [Join our Discord](https://discord.com/invite/kmQUUJysZJ)
Join our Sangha on Discord and please send a friend request to Dhammarato

🌐 **Open Sangha Foundation** — [opensanghafoundation.org](https://opensanghafoundation.org/)
Connect with friends, teachers, and explore places to visit and stay

▶️ **Youtube** — [Dhammarato Dhamma - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/@DhammaratoDhamma)
Videos of Sanghas and One-on-One Calls

🎧 **Podcast** — [Podbean](https://dhammaratodhamma.podbean.com/)
Find our content on Spotify, Apple Podcasts, and more by visiting Podbean

📧 **E-mail Dhammarato** — dhammarato16@gmail.com
Please put name, age, location and practice info when sending an e-mail
